Robert C. Martin Series

The mission of this series is to improve the state of the art of software craftsmanship. The books in this series are technical, pragmatic, and substantial. The authors are highly experienced craftsmen and professionals dedicated to writing about what actually works in practice, as opposed to what might work in theory. You will read about what the author has done, not what he thinks you should do. If the book is about programming, there will be lots of code. If the book is about managing, there will be lots of case studies from real projects.

These are the books that all serious practitioners will have on their bookshelves. These are the books that will be remembered for making a difference and for guiding professionals to become true craftsman.

Managing Agile Projects 

Sanjiv Augustine

Agile Estimating and Planning 

Mike Cohn

Working Effectively with Legacy Code 

Michael C. Feathers

Agile Java™: Crafting Code with Test-Driven Development 

Jeff Langr

Agile Principles, Patterns, and Practices in C# 

Robert C. Martin and Micah Martin

Agile Software Development: Principles, Patterns, and Practices 

Robert C. Martin

Clean Code: A Handbook of Agile Software Craftsmanship 

Robert C. Martin

UML For Java™ Programmers 

Robert C. Martin

Fit for Developing Software: Framework for Integrated Tests 

Rick Mugridge and Ward Cunningham

Agile Software Development with SCRUM 

Ken Schwaber and Mike Beedle

Extreme Software Engineering: A Hands on Approach 

Daniel H. Steinberg and Daniel W. Palmer

For more information, visit informit.com/martinseries

## Contents

Foreword

Introduction

On the Cover

Chapter 1: Clean Code

There Will Be Code

Bad Code

The Total Cost of Owning a Mess

The Grand Redesign in the Sky

Attitude

The Primal Conundrum

The Art of Clean Code?

What Is Clean Code?

Schools of Thought

We Are Authors

The Boy Scout Rule

Prequel and Principles

Conclusion

Bibliography

Chapter 2: Meaningful Names

Introduction

Use Intention-Revealing Names

Avoid Disinformation

Make Meaningful Distinctions

Use Pronounceable Names

Use Searchable Names

Avoid Encodings

Hungarian Notation

Member Prefixes

Interfaces and Implementations

Avoid Mental Mapping

Class Names

Method Names

Don't Be Cute

Pick One Word per Concept

Don't Pun

Use Solution Domain Names

Use Problem Domain Names

Add Meaningful Context

Don't Add Gratuitous Context

Final Words

Chapter 3: Functions

Small!

Blocks and Indenting

Do One Thing

Sections within Functions

One Level of Abstraction per Function

Reading Code from Top to Bottom: The Stepdown Rule

Switch Statements

Use Descriptive Names

Function Arguments

Common Monadic Forms

Flag Arguments

Dyadic Functions

Triads

Argument Objects

Argument Lists

Verbs and Keywords

Have No Side Effects

Output Arguments

Command Query Separation

Prefer Exceptions to Returning Error Codes

Extract Try/Catch Blocks

Error Handling Is One Thing

The Error.java Dependency Magnet

Don't Repeat Yourself

Structured Programming

How Do You Write Functions Like This?

Conclusion

SetupTeardownIncluder

Bibliography

Chapter 4: Comments

Comments Do Not Make Up for Bad Code

Explain Yourself in Code

Good Comments

Legal Comments

Informative Comments

Explanation of Intent

Clarification

Warning of Consequences

TODO Comments

Amplification

Javadocs in Public APIs

Bad Comments

Mumbling

Redundant Comments

Misleading Comments

Mandated Comments

Journal Comments

Noise Comments

Scary Noise

Don't Use a Comment When You Can Use a Function or a Variable

Position Markers

Closing Brace Comments

Attributions and Bylines

Commented-Out Code

HTML Comments

Nonlocal Information

Too Much Information

Inobvious Connection

Function Headers

Javadocs in Nonpublic Code

Example

Bibliography

Chapter 5: Formatting

The Purpose of Formatting

Vertical Formatting

The Newspaper Metaphor

Vertical Openness Between Concepts

Vertical Density

Vertical Distance

Vertical Ordering

Horizontal Formatting

Horizontal Openness and Density

Horizontal Alignment

Indentation

Dummy Scopes

Team Rules

Uncle Bob's Formatting Rules

Chapter 6: Objects and Data Structures

Data Abstraction

Data/Object Anti-Symmetry

The Law of Demeter

Train Wrecks

Hybrids

Hiding Structure

Data Transfer Objects

Active Record

Conclusion

Bibliography

Chapter 7: Error Handling

Use Exceptions Rather Than Return Codes

Write Your Try-Catch-Finally Statement First

Use Unchecked Exceptions

Provide Context with Exceptions

Define Exception Classes in Terms of a Caller's Needs

Define the Normal Flow

Don't Return Null

Don't Pass Null

Conclusion

Bibliography

Chapter 8: Boundaries

Using Third-Party Code

Exploring and Learning Boundaries

Learning log4j

Learning Tests Are Better Than Free

Using Code That Does Not Yet Exist

Clean Boundaries

Bibliography

Chapter 9: Unit Tests

The Three Laws of TDD

Keeping Tests Clean

Tests Enable the -ilities

Clean Tests

Domain-Specific Testing Language

A Dual Standard

One Assert per Test

Single Concept per Test

F.I.R.S.T.

Conclusion

Bibliography

Chapter 10: Classes

Class Organization

Encapsulation

Classes Should Be Small!

The Single Responsibility Principle

Cohesion

Maintaining Cohesion Results in Many Small Classes

Organizing for Change

Isolating from Change

Bibliography

Chapter 11: Systems

How Would You Build a City?

Separate Constructing a System from Using It

Separation of Main

Factories

Dependency Injection

Scaling Up

Cross-Cutting Concerns

Java Proxies

Pure Java AOP Frameworks

AspectJ Aspects

Test Drive the System Architecture

Optimize Decision Making

Use Standards Wisely, When They Add Demonstrable Value

Systems Need Domain-Specific Languages

Conclusion

Bibliography

Chapter 12: Emergence

Getting Clean via Emergent Design

Simple Design Rule 1: Runs All the Tests

Simple Design Rules 2–4: Refactoring

No Duplication

Expressive

Minimal Classes and Methods

Conclusion

Bibliography

Chapter 13: Concurrency

Why Concurrency?

Myths and Misconceptions

Challenges

Concurrency Defense Principles

Single Responsibility Principle

Corollary: Limit the Scope of Data

Corollary: Use Copies of Data

Corollary: Threads Should Be as Independent as Possible

Know Your Library

Thread-Safe Collections

Know Your Execution Models

Producer-Consumer

Readers-Writers

Dining Philosophers

Beware Dependencies Between Synchronized Methods

Keep Synchronized Sections Small

Writing Correct Shut-Down Code Is Hard

Testing Threaded Code

Treat Spurious Failures as Candidate Threading Issues

Get Your Nonthreaded Code Working First

Make Your Threaded Code Pluggable

Make Your Threaded Code Tunable

Run with More Threads Than Processors

Run on Different Platforms

Instrument Your Code to Try and Force Failures

Hand-Coded

Automated

Conclusion

Bibliography

Chapter 14: Successive Refinement

Args Implementation

How Did I Do This?

Args: The Rough Draft

So I Stopped

On Incrementalism

String Arguments

Conclusion

Chapter 15: JUnit Internals

The JUnit Framework

Conclusion

Chapter 16: Refactoring SerialDate

First, Make It Work

Then Make It Right

Conclusion

Bibliography

Chapter 17: Smells and Heuristics

Comments

C1: Inappropriate Information

C2: Obsolete Comment

C3: Redundant Comment

C4: Poorly Written Comment

C5: Commented-Out Code

Environment

E1: Build Requires More Than One Step

E2: Tests Require More Than One Step

Functions

F1: Too Many Arguments

F2: Output Arguments

F3: Flag Arguments

F4: Dead Function

General

G1: Multiple Languages in One Source File

G2: Obvious Behavior Is Unimplemented

G3: Incorrect Behavior at the Boundaries

G4: Overridden Safeties

G5: Duplication

G6: Code at Wrong Level of Abstraction

G7: Base Classes Depending on Their Derivatives

G8: Too Much Information

G9: Dead Code

G10: Vertical Separation

G11: Inconsistency

G12: Clutter

G13: Artificial Coupling

G14: Feature Envy

G15: Selector Arguments

G16: Obscured Intent

G17: Misplaced Responsibility

G18: Inappropriate Static

G19: Use Explanatory Variables

G20: Function Names Should Say What They Do

G21: Understand the Algorithm

G22: Make Logical Dependencies Physical

G23: Prefer Polymorphism to If/Else or Switch/Case

G24: Follow Standard Conventions

G25: Replace Magic Numbers with Named Constants

G26: Be Precise

G27: Structure over Convention

G28: Encapsulate Conditionals

G29: Avoid Negative Conditionals

G30: Functions Should Do One Thing

G31: Hidden Temporal Couplings

G32: Don't Be Arbitrary

G33: Encapsulate Boundary Conditions

G34: Functions Should Descend Only One Level of Abstraction

G35: Keep Configurable Data at High Levels

G36: Avoid Transitive Navigation

Java

J1: Avoid Long Import Lists by Using Wildcards

J2: Don't Inherit Constants

J3: Constants versus Enums

Names

N1: Choose Descriptive Names

N2: Choose Names at the Appropriate Level of Abstraction

N3: Use Standard Nomenclature Where Possible

N4: Unambiguous Names

N5: Use Long Names for Long Scopes

N6: Avoid Encodings

N7: Names Should Describe Side-Effects.

Tests

T1: Insufficient Tests

T2: Use a Coverage Tool!

T3: Don't Skip Trivial Tests

T4: An Ignored Test Is a Question about an Ambiguity

T5: Test Boundary Conditions

T6: Exhaustively Test Near Bugs

T7: Patterns of Failure Are Revealing

T8: Test Coverage Patterns Can Be Revealing

T9: Tests Should Be Fast

Conclusion

Bibliography

Appendix A: Concurrency II

Client/Server Example

The Server

Adding Threading

Server Observations

Conclusion

Possible Paths of Execution

Number of Paths

Digging Deeper

Conclusion

Knowing Your Library

Executor Framework

Nonblocking Solutions

Nonthread-Safe Classes

Dependencies Between Methods Can Break Concurrent Code

Tolerate the Failure

Client-Based Locking

Server-Based Locking

Increasing Throughput

Single-Thread Calculation of Throughput

Multithread Calculation of Throughput

Deadlock

Mutual Exclusion

Lock & Wait

No Preemption

Circular Wait

Breaking Mutual Exclusion

Breaking Lock & Wait

Breaking Preemption

Breaking Circular Wait

Testing Multithreaded Code

Tool Support for Testing Thread-Based Code

Conclusion

Tutorial: Full Code Examples

Client/Server Nonthreaded

Client/Server Using Threads

Appendix B: org.jfree.date.SerialDate

Appendix C: Cross References of Heuristics

Epilogue

Index

## Foreword

One of our favorite candies here in Denmark is Ga-Jol, whose strong licorice vapors are a perfect complement to our damp and often chilly weather. Part of the charm of Ga-Jol to us Danes is the wise or witty sayings printed on the flap of every box top. I bought a two-pack of the delicacy this morning and found that it bore this old Danish saw:

Ærlighed i små ting er ikke nogen lille ting .

「Honesty in small things is not a small thing.」It was a good omen consistent with what I already wanted to say here. Small things matter. This is a book about humble concerns whose value is nonetheless far from small.

God is in the details , said the architect Ludwig mies van der Rohe. This quote recalls contemporary arguments about the role of architecture in software development, and particularly in the Agile world. Bob and I occasionally find ourselves passionately engaged in this dialogue. And yes, mies van der Rohe was attentive to utility and to the timeless forms of building that underlie great architecture. On the other hand, he also personally selected every doorknob for every house he designed. Why? Because small things matter.

In our ongoing「debate」on TDD, Bob and I have discovered that we agree that software architecture has an important place in development, though we likely have different visions of exactly what that means. Such quibbles are relatively unimportant, however, because we can accept for granted that responsible professionals give some time to thinking and planning at the outset of a project. The late-1990s notions of design driven only by the tests and the code are long gone. Yet attentiveness to detail is an even more critical foundation of professionalism than is any grand vision. First, it is through practice in the small that professionals gain proficiency and trust for practice in the large. Second, the smallest bit of sloppy construction, of the door that does not close tightly or the slightly crooked tile on the floor, or even the messy desk, completely dispels the charm of the larger whole. That is what clean code is about.

Still, architecture is just one metaphor for software development, and in particular for that part of software that delivers the initial product in the same sense that an architect delivers a pristine building. In these days of Scrum and Agile, the focus is on quickly bringing product to market. We want the factory running at top speed to produce software. These are human factories: thinking, feeling coders who are working from a product backlog or user story to create product . The manufacturing metaphor looms ever strong in such thinking. The production aspects of Japanese auto manufacturing, of an assembly-line world, inspire much of Scrum.

Yet even in the auto industry, the bulk of the work lies not in manufacturing but in maintenance—or its avoidance. In software, 80% or more of what we do is quaintly called「maintenance」: the act of repair. Rather than embracing the typical Western focus on producing good software, we should be thinking more like home repairmen in the building industry, or auto mechanics in the automotive field. What does Japanese management have to say about that ?

In about 1951, a quality approach called Total Productive Maintenance (TPM) came on the Japanese scene. Its focus is on maintenance rather than on production. One of the major pillars of TPM is the set of so-called 5S principles. 5S is a set of disciplines—and here I use the term「discipline」instructively. These 5S principles are in fact at the foundations of Lean—another buzzword on the Western scene, and an increasingly prominent buzzword in software circles. These principles are not an option. As Uncle Bob relates in his front matter, good software practice requires such discipline: focus, presence of mind, and thinking. It is not always just about doing, about pushing the factory equipment to produce at the optimal velocity. The 5S philosophy comprises these concepts:

• Seiri , or organization (think「sort」in English). Knowing where things are—using approaches such as suitable naming—is crucial. You think naming identifiers isn't important? Read on in the following chapters.

• Seiton , or tidiness (think「systematize」in English). There is an old American saying: A place for everything, and everything in its place . A piece of code should be where you expect to find it—and, if not, you should re-factor to get it there.

• Seiso , or cleaning (think「shine」in English): Keep the workplace free of hanging wires, grease, scraps, and waste. What do the authors here say about littering your code with comments and commented-out code lines that capture history or wishes for the future? Get rid of them.

• Seiketsu , or standardization: The group agrees about how to keep the workplace clean. Do you think this book says anything about having a consistent coding style and set of practices within the group? Where do those standards come from? Read on.

• Shutsuke , or discipline ( self -discipline). This means having the discipline to follow the practices and to frequently reflect on one's work and be willing to change.

If you take up the challenge—yes, the challenge—of reading and applying this book, you'll come to understand and appreciate the last point. Here, we are finally driving to the roots of responsible professionalism in a profession that should be concerned with the life cycle of a product. As we maintain automobiles and other machines under TPM, breakdown maintenance—waiting for bugs to surface—is the exception. Instead, we go up a level: inspect the machines every day and fix wearing parts before they break, or do the equivalent of the proverbial 10,000-mile oil change to forestall wear and tear. In code, refactor mercilessly. You can improve yet one level further, as the TPM movement innovated over 50 years ago: build machines that are more maintainable in the first place. Making your code readable is as important as making it executable. The ultimate practice, introduced in TPM circles around 1960, is to focus on introducing entire new machines or replacing old ones. As Fred Brooks admonishes us, we should probably re-do major software chunks from scratch every seven years or so to sweep away creeping cruft. Perhaps we should update Brooks' time constant to an order of weeks, days or hours instead of years. That's where detail lies.

There is great power in detail, yet there is something humble and profound about this approach to life, as we might stereotypically expect from any approach that claims Japanese roots. But this is not only an Eastern outlook on life; English and American folk wisdom are full of such admonishments. The Seiton quote from above flowed from the pen of an Ohio minister who literally viewed neatness「as a remedy for every degree of evil.」How about Seiso? Cleanliness is next to godliness . As beautiful as a house is, a messy desk robs it of its splendor. How about Shutsuke in these small matters? He who is faithful in little is faithful in much . How about being eager to re-factor at the responsible time, strengthening one's position for subsequent「big」decisions, rather than putting it off? A stitch in time saves nine . The early bird catches the worm. Don't put off until tomorrow what you can do today. (Such was the original sense of the phrase「the last responsible moment」in Lean until it fell into the hands of software consultants.) How about calibrating the place of small, individual efforts in a grand whole? Mighty oaks from little acorns grow. Or how about integrating simple preventive work into everyday life? An ounce of prevention is worth a pound of cure. An apple a day keeps the doctor away. Clean code honors the deep roots of wisdom beneath our broader culture, or our culture as it once was, or should be, and can be with attentiveness to detail.

Even in the grand architectural literature we find saws that hark back to these supposed details. Think of mies van der Rohe's doorknobs. That's seiri . That's being attentive to every variable name. You should name a variable using the same care with which you name a first-born child.

As every homeowner knows, such care and ongoing refinement never come to an end. The architect Christopher Alexander—father of patterns and pattern languages—views every act of design itself as a small, local act of repair. And he views the craftsmanship of fine structure to be the sole purview of the architect; the larger forms can be left to patterns and their application by the inhabitants. Design is ever ongoing not only as we add a new room to a house, but as we are attentive to repainting, replacing worn carpets, or upgrading the kitchen sink. Most arts echo analogous sentiments. In our search for others who ascribe God's home as being in the details, we find ourselves in the good company of the 19th century French author Gustav Flaubert. The French poet Paul Valery advises us that a poem is never done and bears continual rework, and to stop working on it is abandonment. Such preoccupation with detail is common to all endeavors of excellence. So maybe there is little new here, but in reading this book you will be challenged to take up good disciplines that you long ago surrendered to apathy or a desire for spontaneity and just「responding to change.」

Unfortunately, we usually don't view such concerns as key cornerstones of the art of programming. We abandon our code early, not because it is done, but because our value system focuses more on outward appearance than on the substance of what we deliver. This inattentiveness costs us in the end: A bad penny always shows up . Research, neither in industry nor in academia, humbles itself to the lowly station of keeping code clean. Back in my days working in the Bell Labs Software Production Research organization ( Production , indeed!) we had some back-of-the-envelope findings that suggested that consistent indentation style was one of the most statistically significant indicators of low bug density. We want it to be that architecture or programming language or some other high notion should be the cause of quality; as people whose supposed professionalism owes to the mastery of tools and lofty design methods, we feel insulted by the value that those factory-floor machines, the coders, add through the simple consistent application of an indentation style. To quote my own book of 17 years ago, such style distinguishes excellence from mere competence. The Japanese worldview understands the crucial value of the everyday worker and, more so, of the systems of development that owe to the simple, everyday actions of those workers. Quality is the result of a million selfless acts of care—not just of any great method that descends from the heavens. That these acts are simple doesn't mean that they are simplistic, and it hardly means that they are easy. They are nonetheless the fabric of greatness and, more so, of beauty, in any human endeavor. To ignore them is not yet to be fully human.

Of course, I am still an advocate of thinking at broader scope, and particularly of the value of architectural approaches rooted in deep domain knowledge and software usability. The book isn't about that—or, at least, it isn't obviously about that. This book has a subtler message whose profoundness should not be underappreciated. It fits with the current saw of the really code-based people like Peter Sommerlad, Kevlin Henney and Giovanni Asproni.「The code is the design」and「Simple code」are their mantras. While we must take care to remember that the interface is the program, and that its structures have much to say about our program structure, it is crucial to continuously adopt the humble stance that the design lives in the code. And while rework in the manufacturing metaphor leads to cost, rework in design leads to value. We should view our code as the beautiful articulation of noble efforts of design—design as a process, not a static endpoint. It's in the code that the architectural metrics of coupling and cohesion play out. If you listen to Larry Constantine describe coupling and cohesion, he speaks in terms of code—not lofty abstract concepts that one might find in UML. Richard Gabriel advises us in his essay,「Abstraction Descant」that abstraction is evil. Code is anti-evil, and clean code is perhaps divine.

Going back to my little box of Ga-Jol, I think it's important to note that the Danish wisdom advises us not just to pay attention to small things, but also to be honest in small things. This means being honest to the code, honest to our colleagues about the state of our code and, most of all, being honest with ourselves about our code. Did we Do our Best to「leave the campground cleaner than we found it」? Did we re-factor our code before checking in? These are not peripheral concerns but concerns that lie squarely in the center of Agile values. It is a recommended practice in Scrum that re-factoring be part of the concept of「Done.」Neither architecture nor clean code insist on perfection, only on honesty and doing the best we can. To err is human; to forgive, divine. In Scrum, we make everything visible. We air our dirty laundry. We are honest about the state of our code because code is never perfect. We become more fully human, more worthy of the divine, and closer to that greatness in the details.

In our profession, we desperately need all the help we can get. If a clean shop floor reduces accidents, and well-organized shop tools increase productivity, then I'm all for them. As for this book, it is the best pragmatic application of Lean principles to software I have ever seen in print. I expected no less from this practical little group of thinking individuals that has been striving together for years not only to become better, but also to gift their knowledge to the industry in works such as you now find in your hands. It leaves the world a little better than I found it before Uncle Bob sent me the manuscript.

Having completed this exercise in lofty insights, I am off to clean my desk.

James O. Coplien Mørdrup, Denmark

## Introduction

Which door represents your code? Which door represents your team or your company? Why are we in that room? Is this just a normal code review or have we found a stream of horrible problems shortly after going live? Are we debugging in a panic, poring over code that we thought worked? Are customers leaving in droves and managers breathing down our necks? How can we make sure we wind up behind the right door when the going gets tough? The answer is: craftsmanship .

There are two parts to learning craftsmanship: knowledge and work. You must gain the knowledge of principles, patterns, practices, and heuristics that a craftsman knows, and you must also grind that knowledge into your fingers, eyes, and gut by working hard and practicing.

I can teach you the physics of riding a bicycle. Indeed, the classical mathematics is relatively straightforward. Gravity, friction, angular momentum, center of mass, and so forth, can be demonstrated with less than a page full of equations. Given those formulae I could prove to you that bicycle riding is practical and give you all the knowledge you needed to make it work. And you'd still fall down the first time you climbed on that bike.

Coding is no different. We could write down all the「feel good」principles of clean code and then trust you to do the work (in other words, let you fall down when you get on the bike), but then what kind of teachers would that make us, and what kind of student would that make you?

No. That's not the way this book is going to work.

Learning to write clean code is hard work . It requires more than just the knowledge of principles and patterns. You must sweat over it. You must practice it yourself, and watch yourself fail. You must watch others practice it and fail. You must see them stumble and retrace their steps. You must see them agonize over decisions and see the price they pay for making those decisions the wrong way.

Be prepared to work hard while reading this book. This is not a「feel good」book that you can read on an airplane and finish before you land. This book will make you work, and work hard . What kind of work will you be doing? You'll be reading code—lots of code. And you will be challenged to think about what's right about that code and what's wrong with it. You'll be asked to follow along as we take modules apart and put them back together again. This will take time and effort; but we think it will be worth it.

We have divided this book into three parts. The first several chapters describe the principles, patterns, and practices of writing clean code. There is quite a bit of code in these chapters, and they will be challenging to read. They'll prepare you for the second section to come. If you put the book down after reading the first section, good luck to you!

The second part of the book is the harder work. It consists of several case studies of ever-increasing complexity. Each case study is an exercise in cleaning up some code—of transforming code that has some problems into code that has fewer problems. The detail in this section is intense . You will have to flip back and forth between the narrative and the code listings. You will have to analyze and understand the code we are working with and walk through our reasoning for making each change we make. Set aside some time because this should take you days .

The third part of this book is the payoff. It is a single chapter containing a list of heuristics and smells gathered while creating the case studies. As we walked through and cleaned up the code in the case studies, we documented every reason for our actions as a heuristic or smell. We tried to understand our own reactions to the code we were reading and changing, and worked hard to capture why we felt what we felt and did what we did. The result is a knowledge base that desribes the way we think when we write, read, and clean code.

This knowledge base is of limited value if you don't do the work of carefully reading through the case studies in the second part of this book. In those case studies we have carefully annotated each change we made with forward references to the heuristics. These forward references appear in square brackets like this: [H22]. This lets you see the context in which those heuristics were applied and written! It is not the heuristics themselves that are so valuable, it is the relationship between those heuristics and the discrete decisions we made while cleaning up the code in the case studies .

To further help you with those relationships, we have placed a cross-reference at the end of the book that shows the page number for every forward reference. You can use it to look up each place where a certain heuristic was applied.

If you read the first and third sections and skip over the case studies, then you will have read yet another「feel good」book about writing good software. But if you take the time to work through the case studies, following every tiny step, every minute decision—if you put yourself in our place, and force yourself to think along the same paths that we thought, then you will gain a much richer understanding of those principles, patterns, practices, and heuristics. They won't be「feel good」knowledge any more. They'll have been ground into your gut, fingers, and heart. They'll have become part of you in the same way that a bicycle becomes an extension of your will when you have mastered how to ride it.

## Acknowledgments

Thank you to my two artists, Jeniffer Kohnke and Angela Brooks. Jennifer is responsible for the stunning and creative pictures at the start of each chapter and also for the portraits of Kent Beck, Ward Cunningham, Bjarne Stroustrup, Ron Jeffries, Grady Booch, Dave Thomas, Michael Feathers, and myself.

Angela is responsible for the clever pictures that adorn the innards of each chapter. She has done quite a few pictures for me over the years, including many of the inside pictures in Agile Software Develpment: Principles, Patterns, and Practices . She is also my firstborn in whom I am well pleased.

A special thanks goes out to my reviewers Bob Bogetti, George Bullock, Jeffrey Overbey, and especially Matt Heusser. They were brutal. They were cruel. They were relentless. They pushed me hard to make necessary improvements.

Thanks to my publisher, Chris Guzikowski, for his support, encouragement, and jovial countenance. Thanks also to the editorial staff at Pearson, including Raina Chrobak for keeping me honest and punctual.

Thanks to Micah Martin, and all the guys at 8th Light ( www.8thlight.com ) for their reviews and encouragement.

Thanks to all the Object Mentors, past, present, and future, including: Bob Koss, Michael Feathers, Michael Hill, Erik Meade, Jeff Langr, Pascal Roy, David Farber, Brett Schuchert, Dean Wampler, Tim Ottinger, Dave Thomas, James Grenning, Brian Button, Ron Jeffries, Lowell Lindstrom, Angelique Martin, Cindy Sprague, Libby Ottinger, Joleen Craig, Janice Brown, Susan Rosso, et al.

Thanks to Jim Newkirk, my friend and business partner, who taught me more than I think he realizes. Thanks to Kent Beck, Martin Fowler, Ward Cunningham, Bjarne Stroustrup, Grady Booch, and all my other mentors, compatriots, and foils. Thanks to John Vlissides for being there when it counted. Thanks to the guys at Zebra for allowing me to rant on about how long a function should be.

And, finally, thank you for reading these thank yous.

## On the Cover

The image on the cover is M104: The Sombrero Galaxy. M104 is located in Virgo and is just under 30 million light-years from us. At it's core is a supermassive black hole weighing in at about a billion solar masses.

Does the image remind you of the explosion of the Klingon power moon Praxis ? I vividly remember the scene in Star Trek VI that showed an equatorial ring of debris flying away from that explosion. Since that scene, the equatorial ring has been a common artifact in sci-fi movie explosions. It was even added to the explosion of Alderaan in later editions of the first Star Wars movie.

What caused this ring to form around M104? Why does it have such a huge central bulge and such a bright and tiny nucleus? It looks to me as though the central black hole lost its cool and blew a 30,000 light-year hole in the middle of the galaxy. Woe befell any civilizations that might have been in the path of that cosmic disruption.

Supermassive black holes swallow whole stars for lunch, converting a sizeable fraction of their mass to energy. E = MC 2 is leverage enough, but when M is a stellar mass: Look out! How many stars fell headlong into that maw before the monster was satiated? Could the size of the central void be a hint?

The image of M104 on the cover is a combination of the famous visible light photograph from Hubble (right), and the recent infrared image from the Spitzer orbiting observatory (below, right). It's the infrared image that clearly shows us the ring nature of the galaxy. In visible light we only see the front edge of the ring in silhouette. The central bulge obscures the rest of the ring.

But in the infrared, the hot particles in the ring shine through the central bulge. The two images combined give us a view we've not seen before and imply that long ago it was a raging inferno of activity.

Cover image: © Spitzer Space Telescope