# PART 1 WHY FACTS ARE OVERRATED

## the most important perceptual shift in history

My spooky year was fun for me, but it was also a dangerous time for the world’s collective mental health. Enlightenment can be risky business. When your old worldview falls apart, it can trigger all kinds of irrational behavior before your brain rewrites the movie in your head to make it consistent with your new worldview. We all have movies in our heads that we believe are accurate views of reality. And those movies are very different. Normally we don’t notice the differences in our personal movies, or we don’t care. But when politics are involved, the stakes are higher. Then we notice. Emotions are already raw in election years, and millions of people are focused on the same topics at the same time. That’s a barrel of gasoline and a lot of matches in one place. The last thing the country needed was millions of people simultaneously going nuts. I hoped I could reduce that risk by writing about Trump’s persuasion talents and preparing the public for what I saw coming. That will all make more sense later. I also wanted to make sure the public did not miss the greatest show in the world by looking through the wrong filter. If you watched the entire election cycle and concluded that Trump was nothing but a lucky clown, you missed one of the most important perceptual shifts in the history of humankind. I’ll fix that for you in this book. I knew from my own experience as a hypnotist that Trump’s extraordinary skill at persuasion would trigger massive cognitive dissonance and plenty of confirmation bias. If you’re not familiar with those terms, I include quick definitions below. I’ll go into more detail later. If you seek enlightenment, these are two of the most important concepts you will ever learn. Cognitive Dissonance This is a mental condition in which people rationalize why their actions are inconsistent with their thoughts and beliefs. For example, if you think you are smart, but you notice yourself doing something that is clearly dumb, you might spontaneously hallucinate that there was actually a good reason for it. Or perhaps you believe you are an honest person, but you observe yourself doing something dishonest. Your brain will instantly generate a delusion to rationalize the discrepancy. This is a common phenomenon in all normal humans, but we generally believe it applies only to other people. Confirmation Bias This is the human tendency to see all evidence as supporting your beliefs, even if the evidence is nothing more than coincidence. This is another common phenomenon that we believe happens only to other people. I saw in the election of 2016 a dangerous situation forming. If the public misunderstood Trump’s methods and intentions—and that seemed likely—things could turn ugly. Worse yet, the public might not appreciate the extraordinary richness of their choice in the election. No matter what you thought of Trump or his policies,he certainly was different. And he certainly knew how to make things happen. I thought the public deserved to see the Trump candidacy as clearly as possible, without the biased framing that his adversaries were applying. You might be wondering how confident I was about my prediction that Trump would win. Well, no one is psychic. I can’t know with total certainty what the future holds. For example, I couldn’t predict what types of scandals would pop up along the way. But I do know persuasion. I know its power in a way that few people do. And I recognized that with Trump’s level of persuasion skill, he was bringing a flamethrower to a stick fight. And the poor little sticks didn’t see it coming. I had high confidence that Trump would surprise the pundits and win the election. But he did far more than that. Before the Master Persuader was done with the election, he would also remake the Republican Party in his own image, eviscerate the mainstream media’s credibility, and leave the Democratic Party in ruins. The Clinton and Bush dynasties would be charred wrecks on the sides of the road. Over the course of my writing career, I’ve made lots of other public predictions. For example, in my 2004 book, The Religion War, I predicted the rise of an Islamic caliphate in the Middle East, and their use of hobby-sized drones for terror attacks. That happens to be a good description of ISIS in 2017. I had similar confidence in that prediction as I did in Trump’s win. But I have lots of other predictions in my portfolio that were less accurate. Some were whimsical, or wishful thinking, or run-of-the-mill guessing based on limited data. My Trump predictions were the first ones that used the Master Persuader framing. That’s because Master Persuaders are rare. In the investment realm, I made a small fortune betting on Master Persuader Steve Jobs turning Apple into the company it is today. That worked out for me. Likewise, Master Persuaders Warren Buffett and Charlie Munger made a tidy profit for me when I owned Berkshire Hathaway stock. You should never take financial advice from cartoonists, but let me tell you one thing that feels safe to share: If the CEO of a publicly traded company is routinely described as having a “reality distortion field”—as was the case with Steve Jobs—keep an eye on that company. That’s a sign of a Master Persuader. For over a year I did numerous TV, radio, podcast, and print interviews on the topic of my blogging that Trump would win in a “landslide.” It was the spookiest, coolest, most fun year of my life. I’m delighted that you are letting me share this story with you. It’s a good story. And I’ll teach you some insanely useful stuff along the way. The book is organized by three major themes. We’ll start by talking about the limits of the human brain to perceive reality, and that will prime you for the persuasion lessons that follow. Once you have a working understanding of the basics, I’ll show you how I used my understanding of persuasion to predict events in the presidential election of 2016. Keep in mind that the topic of this book is persuasion, and in that realm, President Trump does far more right than wrong. For completeness, appendix D is my discussion of the things candidate Trump did wrong. I hope that acknowledgment frees your mind to enjoy the ride. Ready? Let’s go.

## about facts

On August 13, 2015, I predicted in my blog that Donald Trump had a 98 percent chance of winning the presidency based on his persuasion skills. A week earlier, the most respected political forecaster in the United States—Nate Silver—had put Trump’s odds of winning the Republican nomination at 2 percent in his FiveThirtyEight.com blog. 1 In those early days of the election, the overwhelming majority of pundits in the business regarded Trump as a novelty and a sideshow. Some of the rare and notable predictors of Trump’s win included Mike Cernovich, Ann Coulter, Stefan Molyneux, Milo Yiannopoulos, Bill Mitchell, Robert Baillieul, John McLaughlin, Allan Lichtman, Nigel Farage, Piers Morgan, and late-to-the-party Michael Moore. Persuasion is all about the tools and techniques of changing people’s minds, with or without facts and reason. When I started writing favorable blog posts about Trump’s persuasion talents, it felt like going to war alone. In California, where I live, it seemed as if most Trump supporters were in hiding because of the social and career risks of publicly supporting him. I wasn’t counting on anyone’s having my back in this fight. Luckily, I was wrong. Trump’s Twitter followers adopted me immediately and had my back every step of the way. When the critics came after me on Twitter and elsewhere, Trump supporters flooded in to back me. I didn’t ask them to do it. They just did. One of my motivations for writing this book is that so many people who supported me on Twitter specifically asked me to write it. This book is a favor returned. PERSUASION TIP 2 Humans are hardwired to reciprocate favors. If you want someone’s cooperation in the future, do something for that person today. By the way, reciprocity is a big thing in persuasion. When you do someone a favor, it triggers an automatic reciprocity reflex in the recipient. Humans are hardwired to reciprocate kindness. Sales professionals use this persuasion method all the time. If a salesperson buys you lunch or fixes a problem for you, you’re being persuaded. PERSUASION TIP 3 Persuasion is effective even when the subject recognizes the technique. Everyone knows that stores list prices at $ 9.99 because $ 10.00 sounds like too much. It still works. You might think you can resist persuasion techniques just by recognizing them in action. But knowing the technique won’t protect you as much as you might think. See Persuasion Tip 3. So why did I say Trump had exactly a 98 percent chance of winning when I couldn’t possibly know the odds? That’s a persuasion technique. You saw Trump use the intentional wrongness persuasion play over and over, and almost always to good effect. The method goes like this: Make a claim that is directionally accurate but has a big exaggeration or factual error in it. Wait for people to notice the exaggeration or error and spend endless hours talking about how wrong it is. When you dedicate focus and energy to an idea, you remember it. And the things that have the most mental impact on you will irrationally seem as though they are high in priority, even if they are not. That’s persuasion. If I had boringly predicted that Trump would win the election, without any odds attached to it, the public would have easily shrugged it off as another minor celebrity’s irrelevant opinion. But if I make you pause to argue with me in your mind about the accuracy of the 98 percent estimate, it deepens my persuasion on the main point—that Trump has a surprisingly high likelihood of winning. I picked 98 percent as my Trump prediction because Nate Silver of FiveThirtyEight.com was saying 2 percent. I did that for branding and persuasion purposes. It is easier to remember my prediction both because of the way it fits with Silver’s prediction and for its audacity, which people perceived as “wrongness.” The prediction was designed to attract attention, and it did. It was also designed to pair my name with Nate Silver’s name to raise my profile by association. That worked too. Social media folks mentioned me in the same sentence with Silver countless times during the election, exactly as I had hoped. And every mention raised my importance as a political observer because I was being compared with someone already important in that field. Keep in mind that at this point in our story I was playing the wrong sport. I was a cartoonist writing about politics and persuasion. I needed whatever credibility I could get to build an audience for my Trump blogging. Using a little bit of wrongness (my precise 98 percent prediction), I managed to attract more attention than I would have otherwise. And that conferred on me some credibility by association. As long as I was literally in the same sentence with Nate Silver, I would gain some credibility by proximity alone. Trump used the intentional wrongness persuasion play often, and it seemed to work every time, at least in terms of attracting attention where he wanted it. It even works when you know he’s doing it. If you’re talking about whatever topic he wants you to focus on, he has your mind right where he wants it, even if you are criticizing him for his errors while you are there. For example, take Trump’s campaign promise that he would build a “wall” on the border of Mexico. Common sense tells you that solid walls are not the best solution for all types of terrain. In many locations, the most cost-effective solutions might include wire fences, or digital monitoring of various types, or something else. If Trump had wanted to be accurate, he would have mentioned all of those solutions every time he talked about border security. He did make some casual admissions that the border would be secured in different ways in different places. But most of the time he ignored those details, and wisely so. By continuing to call it a “wall” without details, he caused the public and the media to view that as an error. So they argued about it. They fact-checked it. They put together cost estimates. They criticized Trump for not understanding that it couldn’t be a “wall” the entire way. How stupid can he be????? PERSUASION TIP 4 The things that you think about the most will irrationally rise in importance in your mind. And when they were done criticizing Trump for the “error” of saying he would build one big solid “wall,” the critics had convinced themselves that border security was a higher priority than they had thought coming into the conversation. The ideas that you think about the most are the ones that automatically and irrationally rise in your mental list of priorities. And Trump made us think about the wall a lot. He did that because he knew voters would see him as the strongest voice on the topic. It also sucked up media energy that might have focused on political topics he didn’t understand at the same depth as his competitors. Master Persuaders move your energy to the topics that help them, independent of facts and reason. I’ve said Trump is the best persuader I have ever seen in action. The wall is a perfect example. Consider how much discipline it took for him to avoid continually clarifying that his “wall” was really a patchwork of solutions that depend on the terrain. In order to pull off this type of weapons-grade persuasion, he had to be willing to endure brutal criticism about how dumb he was to think he could secure the border with a solid wall. To make those criticisms go away, all Trump needed to do was clarify that the “wall” was actually a variety of different border solutions, depending on cost and terrain, every time he mentioned it. Easy as pie. But the Master Persuader didn’t want the critics to be silenced. He wanted them to make border control the biggest issue in the campaign just by talking nonstop about how Trump’s “wall” was impractical. As long as people were talking about the wall, Trump was the most important person in the conversation. The Master Persuader moves energy and attention to where it helps him most.

PERSUASION TIP 5 An intentional “error” in the details of your message will attract criticism. The attention will make your message rise in importance—at least in people’s minds—simply because everyone is talking about it. And what about the facts and details? Not so important. Those can get worked out later. I don’t believe Trump purposely injects errors into his work except in the form of oversimplification and hyperbole, as in the wall example. That stuff is intentional for sure. But for the smaller “errors” it is more that he doesn’t bother to correct himself. I use a similar technique with my blog when someone points out a typo. Sometimes I leave the typo because it makes you pause and reread the sentence a few times to figure out what the typo was supposed to mean. The “mistake” attracts your energy to my writing, and that’s what a writer wants. I want your focus. Some mistakes are just ordinary mistakes. But when you see a consistent stream of “mistakes” from a Master Persuader, be open to the possibility that some of those mistakes are about controlling your focus and energy. When you first saw the title of this book, did you think to yourself that Trump doesn’t say “bigly,” he says “big league”? If you noticed my title “error,” it probably helped you remember the book. And now whenever you hear the words “bigly” or “big league” in some other context, it will make you think of this book. The things you think about the most, and remember best, seem more important to you than other things. That’s the persuasion I engineered into the title. During the presidential campaign, it seemed that candidate Trump was making one factual error after another. Social media and the mainstream media were in a feeding frenzy. They called him a liar, a con man, and just plain stupid. Some went so far as to question his sanity. Even more puzzling, Trump often stuck to his claims after the media thoroughly debunked them in front of the world. He still didn’t budge. It was mind-boggling. No one was quite sure if the problem was his honesty, his lack of homework, or some sort of brain problem. But one thing we all knew for sure was that it was hard to ignore. FACTS ARE WEAKER THAN FICTION If you have ever tried to talk someone out of their political beliefs by providing facts, you know it doesn’t work. That’s because people think they have their own facts. Better facts. And if they know they don’t have better facts, they change the subject. People are not easily switched from one political opinion to another. And facts are weak persuasion. So Trump ignores facts whenever they are inconvenient. I know you don’t want to think this works in terms of persuasion. But it does. And I know you want to believe that having a president who ignores facts makes the world a worse place, in a number of vague ways that you can’t quite articulate. But Trump tends to be directionally accurate on the important stuff, and the little stuff never seems to matter. I want to be clear that I’m not expressing a preference for ignoring facts. I’m simply saying that a Master Persuader can do it and still come out ahead, no matter how many times the media points out the errors. The average consumer of political news can hold only a handful of issues in his head. Any of the lesser topics get flushed out of memory. So Trump can invent any reality he wants for the less important topics. All you will remember is that he provided his reasons, he didn’t apologize, and his opponents called him a liar like they always do. True story: Ten minutes ago I read a long list of Trump’s tweets that PolitiFact judged to be factually inaccurate. I can recall only a few of them. They all blended together in my mind, and none made much of an impression. I had no personal or emotional connection to any of them. They were just background noise. 2 PERSUASION TIP 6 If you are not a Master Persuader running for president, find the sweet spot between apologizing too much, which signals a lack of confidence, and never apologizing for anything, which makes you look like a sociopath. If Trump had apologized for any of his factual “errors,” I would remember whatever alleged wrongness triggered the apology. That would stick in my mind. I assume that’s at least partly why he doesn’t do apologies. Apologizing would be a sign of weakness and invite continual demands for more apologies. In Trump’s specific case, apologies wouldn’t have helped his campaign because there would have been too many demands for them. But in the case of normal people who are not Master Persuaders and only occasionally make public mistakes, apologies are still usually the right way to go. If I haven’t yet persuaded you that “mistakes” can be useful in persuasion, consider a small 2012 study by researcher Daniel Oppenheimer that found students had better recall when a font was harder to read. 3 Oppenheimer explains the unexpected result by noting that people slow down and concentrate harder to compensate for the hard-to-read font. That extra concentration is what makes lasting memories form. For more science on the topic of how intentional “mistakes” can aid in memory retention, I recommend the book Impossible to Ignore, by Dr. Carmen Simon. The gist of it is that you need to surprise the brain or make it work a little extra to form memories. Our brains automatically delete our routine memories fairly quickly. Most of us don’t know what we were doing on this day a year ago. But we easily remember things that violate our expectations. A good general rule is that people are more influenced by visual persuasion, emotion, repetition, and simplicity than they are by details and facts. Trump inaccurately described his plans for the wall—it probably won’t be a physical wall for the entire border span—and that lowered his credibility and tainted his brand. But he makes up for it by using solid-gold visual persuasion, calls to emotion, simplicity, repetition, and the “mistake” itself to make his wall idea compelling. If you’re using super strong persuasion, you can be wrong on the facts, and even the logic of your argument, and still win. I will pause here to tell you that while there is lots of science behind the best ways to influence people, choosing among the many ways to persuade via “surprising the brain” can be more art than science. No two situations are alike, so knowing what methods of persuasion worked in a different context might not help you in your current situation. Warning: Intentionally ignoring facts and logic in public is a dangerous strategy unless you are a Master Persuader with thick skin and an appetite for risk. Most of us don’t have the persuasion skills, risk profile, and moral flexibility to pull it off. We don’t know for sure that Trump came out ahead by oversimplifying his wall idea to the point where it sounded crazy to critics and even some supporters. But in my judgment, he probably did come out ahead. By inauguration day, we were talking about the costs and the details of the wall; the country had already accepted that the wall would probably get built, at least in part. And in the long run, presidents are judged by their success. Love it or hate it, historians will someday probably judge Trump’s wall to be a presidential success story. Success cures most types of “mistakes.”

## persuasion vocabulary

I created my own vocabulary about persuasion during the election, on top of some vocabulary from the field of cognitive science. I’ll explore all of the concepts listed here in more detail later. This alphabetized list is provided as a guide in case you later want to refresh your memory. Anchor An anchor is a thought that influences people toward a persuader’s preferred outcome. For example, a big opening demand in a negotiation will form a mental anchor that will bias negotiations toward that high offer. Cognitive Dissonance Cognitive dissonance is a condition of mind in which evidence conflicts with a person’s worldview to such a degree that the person spontaneously generates a hallucination to rationalize the incongruity. Confirmation Bias Confirmation bias is the human tendency to irrationally believe new information supports your existing worldview even when it doesn’t. Filter I use the word “filter” to describe the way people frame their observations of reality. The key idea behind a filter is that it does not necessarily give its user an accurate view of reality. The human brain is not capable of comprehending truth at a deep level. Godzilla “Godzilla” was my nickname for one of the most powerful persuaders in the world. You’ll find out more about Godzilla later. The High-Ground Maneuver The High-Ground Maneuver is a persuasion method that involves elevating a debate from the details on which people disagree to a higher concept on which everyone agrees. Linguistic Kill Shot A linguistic kill shot is a nickname or short set of words so persuasive that it can end an argument or create a specific outcome. Master Persuader A Master Persuader is one who has such mastery of the tools of persuasion that he or she can change the world. Master Persuaders are rare. Moist Robot Moist robot is my framing of human beings as programmable entities. If you provide the right inputs, you get the right outputs. Mole (the Mole) In the context of this book, the Mole is an imagined traitorous helper for the Clinton campaign who intentionally made all the wrong choices in terms of persuasion. Pacing and Leading Pacing involves matching the person you plan to persuade in as many ways as possible, including the way the person thinks, speaks, breathes, and moves. Pacing builds trust because people see you as being the same as them. After pacing, a persuader can then lead, and the subject will be comfortable following. Persuasion Stack A persuasion stack is a collection of persuasion-related skills that work well together. Second Dimension The second dimension describes the most common view of reality—the one in which we believe facts and logic are important to our decisions. This view says humans are reasonable 90 percent of the time, but every now and then we get a bit crazy. Setting the Table Setting the table refers to managing an opponent’s first impressions before negotiations begin. Tells I borrowed this term from poker. In a poker context, it means that a player is giving off a signal—a tell—about how good his cards are. In the context of persuasion, a tell is a signal that someone has been persuaded. But I also use the word generically to indicate any kind of signal. Thinking Past the Sale Thinking past the sale is a persuasion technique in which a subject is prompted to imagine what happens after a decision has been made, to bias the person toward making the decision. Third Act In movie terms, the Third Act is the point in the story in which the hero’s situation looks most dire. I use this terminology to describe any situation in which reality is likely to follow a traditional movie form. Third Dimension The third dimension is where trained persuaders operate. This worldview says humans are irrational 90 percent of the time. The only exceptions are when decisions have no emotional content. Two Movies on One Screen Two movies on one screen is how I describe the phenomenon in which observers can see the same information and interpret it as supporting two entirely different stories. Please refer back to this list if you want to refresh your memory of a concept.