# 
> 2018000模板

PART 2 HOW TO SEE REALITY IN A MORE USEFUL WAY

THE MYTH OF THE RATIONAL MIND Students of philosophy remember that Plato talked about the subjective nature of our personal realities in “The Allegory of the Cave” (Republic, 514a–520a). Plato asked us to imagine a group of people who lived their lives chained to a wall of a cave that faces another wall. On the wall they face, they see shadows of other people walking around in front of a fire elsewhere in the cave, but there is no way for the prisoners to see the other people directly. To this group of cave prisoners, the shadows themselves appear to be real creatures living independent lives. The prisoners would have no reason to think otherwise because the shadows would act and move like living creatures. If you released the cave prisoners, they would soon learn about the properties of fire and shadows, and they would have to reinterpret their entire reality to fit the new data. The point of Plato’s allegory is that—figuratively speaking—we humans might be chained to a cave created by our own faulty brains and senses, experiencing a shadow world that is entirely different from objective reality. Other famous philosophers, notably David Hume (born 1711), have questioned the nature of reality in terms of the existence of free will. If, as some philosophers claim, humans have no free will, and we are nothing but victims of cause and effect, that means our common view of reality is absurd. In this model of the world, we are little more than meat robots who wrongly believe we control our own decisions and actions. Famous German philosopher Immanuel Kant (born 1724) held that the human mind creates the structure of human experience. He explained that our brains don’t have direct access to base reality—we have to settle for interpreting the input from our faulty senses. Kant uses a lot of words to say reality isn’t necessarily anything like the way we perceive it. For the purpose of this book, you don’t need to accept any of these philosophical interpretations of reality. I only mention them to show that smart people throughout history have made arguments about the subjective nature of reality that are compatible with what you will read in these pages. In more recent times, cognitive psychologists and physicists have discovered a lot of eye-opening stuff about the limits of human rationality. For example, Dan Ariely, a professor of psychology and behavioral economics at Duke University, has written and lectured extensively on the topic of how humans believe they are using facts and reason to make decisions but in reality are easily swayed by bias from lots of different sources. Ariely wrote Predictably Irrational (2008). The most famous voice in this realm is Robert Cialdini, a Regents’ Professor Emeritus of psychology and marketing at Arizona State University, and past visiting professor of marketing, business, and psychology at Stanford University. Cialdini’s two best-selling books, Influence (1984) and Pre-Suasion (2016), are master classes in the irrational nature of human decision making. One place you would expect to find the highest level of human rationality is in financial markets, because trillions of dollars are on the line. But we don’t see that rationality, not from common investors and not even from financial professionals. Princeton economist Burton Malkiel taught us about irrational investors in his book A Random Walk Down Wall Street (1973). More recently, philosopher and statistician Nassim Nicholas Taleb wrote the hugely influential book The Black Swan (2007), which explains our human tendency to consistently misinterpret what we observe. And what do physicists say about the nature of reality? That’s a mixed bag of weirdness. Much of what we know to be true by experiment makes absolutely no sense to our limited human brains. Two of my favorite examples are quantum entanglement and the double-slit experiment. I’ll spare you the wonky science, but if you do some reading on those topics, you will quickly learn that the human brain doesn’t have the capacity to understand the nature of reality. Philosopher Nick Bostrom takes things one step further by asking whether we are a “real” species or a simulation created by an intelligent civilization that came before. This idea comes from the simple fact that we will someday be able to create software simulations that believe they are real creatures. And when we achieve that level of technical proficiency, we’re unlikely to stop with one simulation of that type. In the long run, you could expect far more simulated realities than the real one that started it all. So the math of it says we are far more likely to be a simulation than an original species. The interesting thing here is that neither the real species nor the simulations would be in a position to know which one they are. (But just for fun, in appendix C, I propose a way to figure out whether you are real or simulated.) I mention these brilliant philosophers and scientists because they would all agree there are real limits on both human perception and human rationality. I encourage you to remain skeptical about any details in this book, but it might help you to know I’m in good company—philosophically speaking—on the big picture: Humans think they are rational, and they think they understand their reality. But they are wrong on both counts. HOW STRONG IS PERSUASION? Want to see something freaky? Set this book aside and do an Internet search for “the McGurk effect.” Click on the first video you see. It is short. And it will blow your mind when you see how powerful persuasion can be. Near the start of the clip, you see a close-up of a man’s mouth while he repeats, “Bah, bah, bah, bah, bah.” You recognize his lips as forming the B in “bah,” and it all makes sense. Then things get weird. The soundtrack stays the same, but the man moves his lips as if he is forming the sound “fa, fa, fa” instead of “bah, bah, bah.” And while you watch, as if by magic, your brain turns the sound “bah” into “fa.” You know this is an illusion, and you know how they are doing it. And yet it still works. You can go back and forth between the lips that seem to be saying “fa” and the ones that seem to be saying “bah.” In reality, the sound is “bah” all the way from start to finish, but your brain will instantly translate the “bah” into “fa” when the lips on the video are moving as if they are creating an F sound. This is a great example of how visual persuasion is more powerful than auditory persuasion. Our visual sense changes what we are hearing in real time, even when we know the illusion. If you don’t have time to watch the video right now, make a point of doing it before you finish the book. You won’t fully appreciate the power of persuasion until you do. The main theme of this book is that humans are not rational. We bounce from one illusion to another, all the while thinking we are seeing something we call reality. The truth is that facts and reason don’t have much influence on our decisions, except for trivial things, such as putting gas in your car when you are running low. On all the important stuff, we are emotional creatures who make decisions first and rationalize them after the fact. If you are normal, or anything like normal, you probably think I am exaggerating about how irrational we human beings are. Perhaps you don’t feel irrational. But consider the U.S. election of 2016, in which Donald J. Trump unexpectedly beat Hillary Clinton in the Electoral College to win the election. I think it is obvious that roughly half of the people in the United States made a deeply irrational decision in that election. But which half? As a general rule, irrational people don’t know they are irrational. After the election results came in, both halves of the country accused the other half of being irrational. As a trained hypnotist, I can tell you with confidence that both halves were right. THE PERSUASION FILTER The common view of reality is that the way you see the world is not only accurate but universally shared. For all I know, that might be true. But it might also be the case that reality is something quite different from what you perceive. That possibility might feel unlikely to you. Watch me change your mind. I’ll do it by explaining my personal journey through what I call the filters. The key concept of a filter is that it is not intended to give you an accurate view of reality. All it is supposed to do is give you better results than other filters. And I propose that the best way to objectively determine the usefulness of a filter is by asking if it makes you happy and also does a good job of predicting the future. The Persuasion Filter (the main topic of this book) does a great job of making people happy, or so I observe. And it did a great job predicting a number of unlikely events in the presidential election of 2016. That’s what I call a good filter. What I don’t claim is that the Persuasion Filter is an accurate view of reality. I have no reason to believe humans evolved with the capability to understand their reality. That capability was not important to survival. When it comes to evolution, any illusion that keeps us alive long enough to procreate is good enough. I’ll give you a tour of the filters I have used over my lifetime to give you an idea of what I mean. THE SANTA CLAUS FILTER When I was a child, it was customary for adults to indoctrinate kids with an entertaining belief in magic of all kinds. For several years of my youth, I thought Santa Claus was real. I also believed in the Tooth Fairy, the Easter Bunny, and Superman. My filter on life allowed all sorts of magical creatures to exist. The interesting part—and the lesson here—is that this total misconception about reality did an excellent job of keeping me happy and predicting the future. There was no penalty for being totally wrong about reality. I liked toys, and I liked knowing Santa was efficient, punctual, immortal, and suspiciously generous. I liked knowing that the Tooth Fairy and the Easter Bunny would deliver the goods too. It was a great filter on reality until I was old enough to realize there were simply too many chimneys and too little time for Santa to get the job done. And his sled was totally undersized. The numbers didn’t add up. The other magical creatures that inhabited my filter also faded in the light of what I assumed was my higher level of knowledge and reason. But I was wrong. All I did was move to another filter with new characters. THE CHURCH FILTER From the ages of about six to eleven, I attended Sunday school at the Methodist church that was a short walk from my house. I believed everything the church told me because I didn’t see any reason they would put so much energy into a centuries-long, elaborate lie. And I assumed all those people couldn’t be wrong. As a child, I understood that other religions existed. But the Methodist Church explained away that discrepancy in my filter by saying all the other religions were wrong. That seemed reasonable to me. And it seemed that 100 percent of the people in my small town of Windham, New York, were Christians of one flavor or another. In hindsight, I assume the atheists were just staying off the radar. My church filter worked great most of the time. I was happy that I would go to heaven. But the filter didn’t seem to do a great job of predicting anything while I was still alive. Prayers didn’t seem to influence my outcomes in any reliable way. And no one could predict the next miracle, or the birth of the next saint. I was starting to have my doubts about the church filter. One day in Sunday school we learned a Bible story about Jonah and the giant fish. The quick version of the story is that Jonah was about to drown in the ocean and God sent a giant fish to save him. The fish accomplished this task by swallowing Jonah whole. Jonah then lived for three days in the belly of the fish, praying to God. After three days, God told the fish to spit out Jonah, and it did. Miraculously (literally), Jonah was none the worse for living in stomach acid without oxygen for three days. That was the tipping point for me. I called a meeting with my mother and announced that I was discontinuing my religious education. I explained my new hypothesis that she and all other believers were being duped for reasons I couldn’t understand, but I planned to get to the bottom of it. My mother listened to my reasoning, acknowledged that I was making a well-informed decision, and never asked me to attend church again. My mom was awesome that way. Once the church filter fell away, I suddenly found myself living in an absurd world. According to my new worldview, I was the only person—as far as I knew—who could see religion for the scam that it was. Obviously there were plenty of nonbelievers in the world, but they were invisible to me in my pre-Internet, small-town life. I needed a new filter to describe how an eleven-year-old boy could be the only one in the world who saw reality for what it really was. To explain my situation I came up with . . . THE ALIEN EXPERIMENT FILTER The alien experiment filter imagined that intelligent creatures from another world impregnated my mother so they could find out what happens when humans and aliens mate. According to that filter, the aliens were watching me at all times. I accepted this as true (enough) for several years of my childhood. The alien experiment filter did a good job of explaining why I was so different from the people in my town, but it didn’t make me happy, and it wasn’t any good for predicting what would happen next. It wasn’t a useful filter. Eventually I dropped that filter in favor of . . . THE ATHEIST FILTER The atheist filter imagines that there is no supreme being. It also imagines that humans are rational creatures and they can understand their environment through observation, science, and reason. This filter was a perfect fit for a rebellious young man. It gave me something juicy to argue about, and I did, whenever anyone would listen. I enjoyed the debates, but I can’t say that my atheist filter ever made me happy. Nor did it do a great job of predicting the future, except that I could predict that my prayers would not be answered, and no miracles would happen while I was watching. But those are special cases. As a general rule, I couldn’t predict anything using the atheist filter. The atheist filter might turn out to be one of the more accurate views of reality, but that mattered less to me than the fact that it wasn’t useful. It didn’t make me happy and it didn’t help me predict what would happen next. But there were more filters to come. THE WEED FILTER I smoked a lot of marijuana in college. One of the most puzzling aspects of being high was that the people around me who were not high seemed nicer than usual. For years I assumed I was only imagining that people were being extra nice to me when I was high. The simplest explanation for my subjective experience was that the drug was altering my perception of the world. I started to feel as if I had one reality when I was normal and an entirely different reality when I was high. The interesting thing is that both of those realities worked fine. When I was high, I could still navigate the world and do all the things that people do. There were a few activities, such as studying for tests, that I didn’t do as well when high. And driving was a bad idea. But for most daily activities there was no important difference in how I performed. That’s when I started to realize that people could be living in different realities while inhabiting the same room. I knew from my own experience that I could experience two realities in the same room just by going from normal to high. In later years I came to understand why everyone seemed so much nicer to me when I was high. It turns out that people were actually nicer to me. And there is a perfectly good reason: My cheery and relaxed attitude while high was rubbing off on the people around me. My other reality—the one in which I was not high—brought out my more intense, ambitious, and introspective personality. People respond to that personality with less friendliness because I look like I’m all business, and it rubs off on them. I wasn’t perceiving reality to be different when I was high—I was causing it to be different. Here again we can see that the true nature of reality—if such a thing exists—was somewhat irrelevant to my day-to-day life. My reality made perfect sense when I believed I was only imagining that people were acting nicer to me when I was high. And reality still made sense when I realized (or believed) I was causing that niceness by my own demeanor. The choice of filter didn’t make much difference to my life. The weed filter was a big improvement over my past filters because it made me happy (obviously), but it also had some predictive power. When I was high, I knew people would respond to me in a certain way, on average, and they did. Or so it seemed. And that’s all that mattered. But the weed filter is limited, at best. THE MUSHROOM FILTER I moved to San Francisco at age twenty-one, and a friend talked me into trying psychedelic mushrooms. It was the best day of my life, at least in terms of pure joy. And that isn’t an exaggeration. No other experience has ever come close. But while the pleasure was temporary—literally just a spike in certain brain chemistry—the experience left me permanently changed. As those of you who have tried psychedelics already know, words can’t describe the experience. But I’ll try to explain it in the limited context of filters. When you are on mushrooms, you understand the world around you, and you can operate within it. But at the same time, you become aware that your interpretation of your reality is fluid. You see ordinary items almost as if you are an alien visiting this strange world for the first time, but for some odd reason you know what everything is and what it does. In other words, you become aware that your perceptions are independent from the underlying reality. That awareness never leaves you. Once you understand your experience of life as an interpretation of reality, you can’t go back to your old way of thinking. After taking psychedelics, you might stop seeing your old interpretation of reality as the only “true” version. That’s what happened to me. Kids, please don’t take drugs. Drugs can be dangerous. I don’t recommend trying marijuana or psychedelics. You’ll get a similar perceptual shift by reading this book. I designed it to do exactly that. In other words, I took all of those drugs so you don’t have to. You’re welcome.

THE MOIST ROBOT FILTER My current filter on life is what I call the moist robot filter. I wrote about it in detail in my book How to Fail at Almost Everything and Still Win Big. The summary is that human brains are moist computers that can be reprogrammed if you know where the user interface is. For example, we know that going to school can change the physical structure of your brain by making it form new connections and new memories. That part is obvious. But there are lots of other ways to reprogram your brain to develop useful habits, change your energy level, hack your happiness, and more. The moist robot filter assumes your brain is subject to the laws of physics and doesn’t have any magical qualities such as free will or a soul. For our purposes here, we don’t need to debate whether humans have free will or souls. Remember, filters are not about knowing reality. The role of a filter is limited to making you happy and helping you predict the future. Humans don’t always need to know the true nature of reality in order to live well. The moist robot filter is the filter that makes me happiest, and it does the best job of predicting. The Persuasion Filter—the topic of this book—is a subset of the moist

