罗杰·尼伯恩.(2023).精进之路-从新手到大师的心智升级之旅.(姜帆译).机械工业出版社 => 扩展阅读

Roger Kneebone.(2020).2023051Expert-Understanding-the-Path-to-Mastery.Penguin Books Ltd

### Acknowledgements

Expert draws on conversations and collaborations with countless people over several decades. Though I cannot mention all those people by name, my debt to them is incalculable. As anyone who has compiled an invitation list of fairy godmothers will be painfully aware, there is always a danger of forgetting someone who should have been included. If I have done that, I hope I will escape the traditional consequences of such an omission.

In this book, I draw on many experts. They have been extraordinarily generous with their time, their insights and their encouragement, and they have influenced my thinking profoundly. Some appear and reappear throughout my story. Joshua Byrne has shaped my thinking since we first met over ten years ago, and our conversations form the foundation of this book. Fleur Oakes, Richard McDougall, Will Houstoun, Fabrice Ringuet and Sophie Yates have helped me think in new ways about the steps on the path to becoming expert.

Paul Jakeman, Andrew Davidson, Derek Frampton, Duncan Hooson, Phil Bayman, Katharine Coleman, John Launer and Jozef Youssef have all shone light from different perspectives. Andrew Garlick, Alan Spivey, Kirsty Flower, Marta Ajmar, Merlin Strangeway, Liam Noble, Lucy Lyons, David Dolan, Jeremy Jackman, Rachel Warr, David Owen, Dimitri Bellos, Margot Cooper, Sam Gallivan, Florence Thomas, Harold Ellis, Mary Neiland and Colin Bicknell have helped me develop my ideas.

I have mentioned Thread Management, an event at the Art Workers' Guild. Other events include Thinking with Your Hands and a symposium at Imperial which I called The Art of Performing Science. These, too, have shaped my thinking and provided rich soil for my ideas. Through film and conversation, Paul Craddock has played a central role in all of these events.

A pivotal figure in my thinking has been the semiotician and educator Gunther Kress, who died suddenly in June 2019. Our conversations, which took place over more than a decade, were instrumental in developing my ideas for this book. Gunther was a mentor, an inspiration and a true friend. I miss him more than I can say.

I have also been inspired by John Wickham, the pioneering urologist whose work I describe in the book's closing sections. John died in October 2017 at the age of eighty-nine. To me, he captured what being expert is about. Gentle, modest and humane, he too was an inspiration and a friend. His colleagues Mike Kellett, Stuart Greengrass, Chris Russell and Toni Raybould have been immensely helpful, and John's widow Ann has been generosity itself.

Many friends have helped my thinking, especially Julia Anderson. Further back still, my mentors Aylwyn Mannell, Andy Hall and Jeremy Duncan Brown inspired and supported me during my clinical careers. I received unfailing support from my GP partners at Lovemead Group Practice in Trowbridge, Wiltshire – especially Jeremy Bradbrooke and the late Stephen Henry.

I am deeply indebted to the Art Workers' Guild, the extraordinary organization I first mentioned at the start of this book. Many of the experts whose stories I draw on are Brothers (as they are traditionally called, irrespective of gender) of the Guild. As individuals, their insights have been illuminating. As a group, they have made me think in unexpected ways. Being invited to join as a Brother myself has been an honour. Particular thanks must go to Prue Cooper, potter and Past Master of the Guild.

I thank my many colleagues at Imperial College London and beyond, including Fernando Bello, Kirsten Dalrymple and Debra Nestel – long-standing friends and collaborators. I also thank Aaron Williamon of the Royal College of Music – friend, colleague, and joint director with me of the RCM–Imperial Centre for Performance Science.

I thank, too, the staff and students on the Imperial Master in Education (MEd) in Surgical Education and the academics and doctoral students who have helped me develop my ideas. They include Anne Yeh, Sacha Harris, Alex Cope, Tamzin Cuming, Sharon Weldon, Claudia Schlegel and Jeff Bezemer. I thank Barry Smith for his generosity with ideas and insights. And I thank the Wellcome Trust, whose 2012 Engagement Fellowship gave me the freedom to explore the ideas which developed into this book. That opportunity was transformative.

I am indebted to the City and Guilds of London Art School, the Royal Academy of Arts, Gresham College, and many museums and institutions in the UK and overseas for giving me the opportunity to develop my ideas. Also my friend Will Liddell, who first alerted me to the existence of invisible fish.

Next I must thank Jack Ramm, my editor. Jack's contribution has been immense. His commitment, clarity of thought, and support for me as an author – in a word, his care – have been extraordinary. It has been a privilege to work with him. My thanks also to Connor Brown and all the staff at Penguin Books.

Finally, to my family. My daughters Emily and Rachel have been both enthusiastic and encouraging, and with them I have explored many ideas that cross disciplinary boundaries.

The greatest debt of all is to my wife, Dusia. Words are wholly inadequate to express the support and inspiration she has given me. I dedicate this book to her.

### About the Author

Professor Roger Kneebone directs the Imperial College Centre for Engagement and Simulation Science and the Royal College of Music–Imperial College Centre for Performance Science. His first career was as a surgeon, operating on trauma patients in southern Africa. He then changed direction, becoming a general practitioner in south-west England. Now, as an academic at Imperial College London, he researches what experts from different fields can learn from one another. His unorthodox and creative team includes clinicians, computer scientists, musicians, magicians, potters, puppeteers, tailors and fighter pilots. This is his first book for a general readership.

1 Experts and invisible fish

1 When I use these terms with an initial capital letter I'm referring to this common-sense use, without having to keep specifying that terms like ‘journeyman' are nowadays gender-neutral. I'll use lower case for current usage, such as apprenticeship programmes in industry or when talking about mastery in other contexts.

2 The surgeon and the tailor

1 I've changed names and other details of all the patients and clinical colleagues in this book, to preserve confidentiality.

## Further reading

My podcast Countercurrent features extended conversations with many of the experts in this book.

See http://apple.co/2n5ROy1

Bereiter, Carl, and Marlene Scardamalia, Surpassing Ourselves: An Inquiry into the Nature and Implications of Expertise (Open Court, 1993). This book explores the ideas of routine and adaptive expertise which I outline in Chapter 3 .

Collins, Harry, and Robert Evans, Rethinking Expertise (University of Chicago Press, 2007). The authors develop ideas around contributory and interactional expertise, which I refer to in this book.

Ericsson, K. A., and N. Charness, ’Expert Performance: Its structure and acquisition', American Psychologist , 49:8 (1994), 725–47 . K. Anders Ericsson's work has been highly influential. This paper gives a flavour of the principles he has distilled from a lifetime's research.

Graziano, Michael, The Spaces Between Us: A Story of Neuroscience, Evolution, and Human Nature (Oxford University Press, 2018). This accessible book summarizes Graziano's decades-long research into the neuroscientific basis of personal space.

Johnstone, Keith, Impro: Improvisation and the Theatre (Methuen Drama, 1981) . A classic work on improvisation – witty, perceptive and easy to read. In it, Johnstone explains the crucial difference between ‘Yes, and …' and ‘Yes, but …' in improvisation.

Lave, Jean, and Etienne Wenger, Situated Learning: Legitimate Peripheral Participation (Cambridge University Press, 1991). This influential and accessible book develops the proposition that learning takes place in the context in which it is applied.

McGilchrist, Iain, The Master and His Emissary: The Divided Brain and the Making of the Western World (Yale University Press, 2009). This riveting and persuasive book explores the relationship between the differing world views of the right and left sides of the brain.

Meyer, Jan, and Ray Land, Threshold Concepts and Troublesome Knowledge: Linkages to Ways of Thinking and Practising within the Disciplines (Enhancing Teaching-Learning Environments in Undergraduate Courses Project, Universities of Edinburgh, Coventry and Durham, 2003). Threshold concepts are a useful way of thinking about learning, and this report sets out the fundamental principles.

Neighbour, Roger, The Inner Consultation (Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1987). This book had a pivotal effect on me when I became a general practitioner. Wise, eclectic and unorthodox, it made me realize the central role of the consultation in medicine.

Pallasmaa, Juhani, The Thinking Hand: Existential and Embodied Wisdom in Architecture (John Wiley & Sons, 2009). This short book puts forward challenging and illuminating ideas. In it, the author writes: ‘There are still countless skills and an immense stock of unverbalised knowledge around the world, embedded in ageless modes of life and livelihoods, that need to be maintained and restored.'

Pirsig, Robert M., Zen and the Art of Motorcycle Maintenance (William Morrow and Company, 1974). This fictionalized autobiography explores the nature of ‘Quality' through a motorcycle journey from Minnesota to California. Enormously influential and highly idiosyncratic, it remains both thought-provoking and challenging.

Pye, David, The Nature and Art of Workmanship (Cambridge University Press, 1968). This short book sets out Pye's influential ideas, as relevant now as when the book was first published.

Sennett, Richard, The Craftsman (Yale University Press, 2008). Sennett, a sociologist and musician, explores the many dimensions of skill through a broad historical sweep and asks what is meant by good work.

Tamariz, Juan, The Five Points in Magic (Hermetic Press, 2007). A short book by a leading magician, outlining key principles for capturing and shaping an audience's attention.

Wertsch, James, Vygotsky and the Social Formation of Mind (Harvard University Press, 1985). This sets out Vygotsky's thinking and provides an excellent introduction to his influential work.

Wickham, John, An Open and Shut Case: The Story of Keyhole or Minimally Invasive Surgery (World Scientific Publishing Company, 2017). This fascinating memoir by a pioneer of keyhole surgery captures his innovative spirit, his gentle wit and his humanity.

Bereiter, Carl, and Marlene Scardamalia, 《超越自我：对专业知识本质及其影响的探询》（开放法院出版社，1993 年）。本书探讨了我在第三章中概述的常规和适应性专业知识的概念。

Collins, Harry, and Robert Evans, 《重新思考专业知识》（芝加哥大学出版社，2007 年）。作者发展了有关贡献性和交互性专业知识的思想，这些在本书中有所提及。

Ericsson, K. A., and N. Charness, 《专家表现：其结构和获取》，《美国心理学家》，49:8（1994 年），页 725-747。K. Anders Ericsson 的工作具有极高的影响力。这篇论文概述了他一生研究成果的原则。

Graziano, Michael, 《我们之间的空间：神经科学、进化和人类本性的故事》（牛津大学出版社，2018 年）。这本通俗易懂的书总结了 Graziano 长达数十年的神经科学研究成果。

Johnstone, Keith, 《即兴：即兴创作与戏剧》（梅瑟恩戏剧出版社，1981 年）。关于即兴创作的经典著作 —— 诙谐、敏锐且易于阅读。在书中，Johnstone 解释了即兴表演中「是的，而且……」与「是的，但是……」的关键区别。

Lave, Jean, and Etienne Wenger, 《情境学习：合法的边缘参与》（剑桥大学出版社，1991 年）。这本有影响力且易于理解的书提出了学习发生在其应用的情境中的观点。

McGilchrist, Iain, 《主人与他的使者：分裂的大脑与西方世界的形成》（耶鲁大学出版社，2009 年）。这本引人入胜且令人信服的书探讨了大脑右半球和左半球不同世界观的关系。

Meyer, Jan, and Ray Land, 《阈概念与棘手知识：与学科内思维和实践方式的联系》（爱丁堡、考文垂和杜伦大学增强本科课程教学环境项目，2003 年）。阈概念是思考学习的一种有用方式，本报告阐述了基本原则。

Neighbour, Roger, 《内部咨询》（克鲁沃学术出版社，1987 年）。当我成为一名全科医生时，这本书对我产生了重要影响。聪明、多元且非传统，它让我意识到咨询在医学中的核心作用。

Pallasmaa, Juhani, 《思考之手：建筑中的存在主义与体验智慧》（约翰威利与儿子出版社，2009 年）。这本短书提出了挑战性且启发性的思想。作者在书中写道：「世界上仍有无数的技能和大量未言明的知识，它们植根于古老的生活方式和生计中，需要被保持和恢复。」

Pirsig, Robert M., 《禅与摩托车维修艺术》（威廉莫罗公司，1974 年）。这部虚构的自传探索了通过从明尼苏达到加利福尼亚的摩托车旅行来理解「质量」的本质。它极具影响力且非常独特，依然发人深省且具有挑战性。

Pye, David, 《工艺的性质与艺术》（剑桥大学出版社，1968 年）。这本短书阐述了 Pye 的有影响力的思想，和它首次出版时一样具有相关性。

Sennett, Richard, 《工匠》（耶鲁大学出版社，2008 年）。作为一名社会学家和音乐家，Sennett 探索了技能的多个维度，通过广泛的历史梳理，询问什么是优秀的工作。

Tamariz, Juan, 《魔法中的五点》（赫尔墨斯出版社，2007 年）。这是一本由著名魔术师编写的短书，概述了吸引并塑造观众注意力的关键原则。

Wertsch, James, 《维果茨基与心智的社会形成》（哈佛大学出版社，1985 年）。这本书阐述了维果茨基的思想，并为其有影响力的工作提供了极好的介绍。

Wickham, John, 《开合无间：微创手术的故事》（世界科学出版公司，2017 年）。这本由微创手术先驱所写的迷人回忆录捕捉了他的创新精神、温和的智慧和人文关怀。