# 参考文献

## 01. 英文部分

Abreu D.,1986, “External Equilibria of Oligopolistic Supergame.” Journal of Economic Theory 39: 191-225.

Acemoglu, Daron and James A. Robinson, 2006, Economic Origins of Dictatorship and Democracy, Cambridge University Press.

Akerlof, G.,1970, “The Market for Lemons: Quality Uncertainty and the Market Mechanism.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 84(3):488-500.

Alchian, A. and H. Demsetz, 1972, “Production, Information Costs and Economic Organization.” American Economic Review, 62:777-795.

Appiah, Kwame Anthony, 2010, The Honor Code: How Moral Revolutions Happen, W.W.Norton & Company, Inc. （中文版：〔美〕奎迈·安东尼·阿皮亚，《荣誉规则：道德革命是如何发生的》，中央编译局出版社2011年版。）

Armstrong, Mark, Simon Cowan and John Vickers, 1995, Regulatory Reform, MIT Press.

Arrow, Kenneth, 1963, Social Choice and Individual Values. New York: John Wiley and Sons. (Revised Edition)

Arthur, W. Brian,1990, “Positive Feedback in the Economy.” Scientific American, 262:92-99.

Arthur, W. Brian,1994, Increasing Returns and Path Dependence in the Economy, Ann Arbor, Michigan: University of Michigan Press.

Aumann, Robert, 1976, “Agreeing to disgree.” Annals of Statistics, 4:1236-1239.

Aumann, Robert, 1976,“An elementary proof that integration preserves uppersemicontinuity.” Journal of Mathematical Economics, Elsevier, 3(1): 15-18.

Aumann, Robert and Sergiu Hart, 1992, Handbook of Game Theory with Economic Applications, North-Holland.

Axelrod, Robert and William D. Hamilton,1981, “The Evolution of Cooperation.” Science, New Series,211 (4489):1390-1396.

Axelrod, Robert., 1984, The Evolution of Cooperation. Basic Books.

Axelrod, Robert., 1986, “An Evolutionary Approach to Norms.” American Political Science Review, 80（4）：1095-1111.

Barnett, Thomas P.M., 2009, Great Power: America and the World After Bush, G.P. Putnam's Sons Publisher.

Baro, Robert, 1986, “Reputation in a Model of Monetary Policy with Incomplete Information.” Journal of Monetary Economics, 17: 3-20.

Basu, Kaushik, 1998, “Social Norms and the Law.” published in Peter Newman, ed., The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics and Law. London: Macmillan.

Basu, Kaushik, 2000, “The Role of Norms and Law in Economics.” working paper, Department of Economics, Cornell University.

Bendor, Jonathan and Piotr Swistak, 2001, “The Evolution of Norms.” American Journal of Sociology, 106(6):1493-1545.

Bergstrom，Theodore C., 2002,“Evolution of Social Behaviour: Individual and Group Selection.” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 16（2): 67-88.

Bernheim, Douglas D. and Michael Whinston,1990,“Multimarket contact and collusive behavior.” Rand Journal of Economics,21(1):1-26.

Bernstein, L., 1992, “Opting Out of the Legal System: Extralegal Contractual Relation in the Diamond Industry.” Journal of Legal Studies, 21: 115-157.

Binmore, K., 1987, “Modelling rational players.” Economics and Philosopy, 3:179-214.

Binmore, K., 1987,“Nash bargaining theory I,II.” in Binmore, K., and Dasgupta, P. (eds.), The Economics of Bargaining, Cambridge: Basic Blackwell.

Binmore, K., 1997, “Introduction.” in Nash, J. F. Jr. (ed.), Essays on Game Theory, Chetenham: Edward Elgar.

Bodenheimer, Edgar, 1962, Jurisprudence: The Philosophy and Method of the Law, Revised Edition, Harvard University Press.

Boyd, Robert and Peter J. Richerson, 1985, Culture and the Evolutionary Process.University of Chicago Press.

Brealey, Richard A. and Stewart Myers C., 2000, Principles of Coporate Finance (Sixth Edition), Irwin McGraw-Hill.

Bruce L. Benson, 1990, The Enterprise of Law: Justice Without the State, San Francisco: Pacific Research Institute.

Burn, E. H., 1990, Maudsley & Burn's Trusts & Trustees: Cases and Materials. Butterworths.

Carmichael, H.L., 1988, “Incentives in Academics: Why is There Tenure.” Journal of Political Economy, 96: 453-472.

Chen, Zhao and Sang-Ho Lee, 2009, “Incentives in Academic Tenure under Asymmetric Information.” Economic Modelling, 26: 300-308.

Cheung, Steven, 1973, “The Fable of the Bees: An Economic Investigation.” Journal of Law and Economics 16: 11-33. (中文版：张五常，《经济解释：张五常经济论文选》，商务印书馆2000年版，第133-161页。)

Clarke, E. H., 1971, “Multipart Pricing of Public Goods.” Public Choice， 11: 17-33.

Coase, Ronald, 1960, “The Problem of Social Cost.” Journal of Law and Economics,3: 1-44.

Coase, Ronald, 1972, “Durability and Monopoly.” Journal of Law and Economics, 15(1):143-149.

Coase, Ronald, 1974, “The Lighthouse in Economics.” Journal of Law and Economics,17:357-376.

Coleman, James, 1990, Foundations of Social Theory. Cambridge, Mass and London: Harvard University Press.

Cooter, Robert, 1991,“Coase Theorem.” The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics, The Macmillan Press.

Cooter, Robert,1995, “Law and Unified Social Theory.” Journal of Law and Society, 22(1): 50-67.

Cooter, Robert, 1996,“The Rule of State Law Versus the Rule-of-Law State: Economic Analysis of the Legal Foundations of Development.” The Paper for the Annual Bank Conference on Development Economics, World Bank, April 25-26, 1996, Wahsingtong, D.C.

Cooter, Robert, 1997, “Law from Order.” mimio, University of California Berkeley.

Cooter, Robert, 1997, “Normative Failure Theory of Law.” Cornell Law Review, 82(5): 947-979.

Cooter, Robert, 2000a,“Three Effects of Social Norms on Law: Expression, Deterrence, and Internalization.” Oregon Law Review, 79(1): 1-22.

Cooter, Robert, 2000b,“Do Good Laws Make Good Citizens？ An Economic Analysis of Internalized Norms.” Virgina Law Review, 50(8):1577-1601.

Crawford, V. and J. Sobel, “Strategic Information Transmission.” Econometrica, 50: 1431-1451.

David, Paul, 1985, “Clio and the Economics of QWERTY.” American Economic Review,75(2): 332-337.

Delong, Bradford, 1991,“Did J. P. Mogan's Man Add Value？ An Economist's Perspective on Financial Capitalism.”Inside the Business Enterprise: Historical Perspectives on the Use of Information, edited by Peter Temin, University of Chicago Press.

Diener, Ed, Louis Tayand and David G. Myers, 2011,“The religion paradox: If religion makes people happy, why are so many dropping out？” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,101(6): 1278-1290.

Di Tella, Rafael and Ernesto Schargrodsky, 2003,“The Role of Wages and Auditing during a Crackdown on Corruption in the City of Buenos Aies.” Journal of Law and Economics, 46 (1): 269-292.

DiMaggio, P.J.， 1988， “Interest and agency in institutional theory.” In L. Zucker (Ed.), Institutional Patterns and Organizations， 3-22. Cambridge, MA: Ballinger.

Dixit, Avinash, 1996, The Making of Economic Policy. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1996.

Dixit, Avinash, 1997, “Power of incentives in private versus public organizations.” The American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings, 87: 378-382.

Dixit, Avinash, 2004, Lawlessness and Economics: Alternative Models of Governance, Princeton University Press.

Djankov，Simeon, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-De-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer, 2002.“The Regulation of Entry.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 117(1): 1-37.

Eisenstadt, S.N.， 1980， “Cultural orientations, institutional entrepreneurs and social change: Comparative analyses of traditional civilizations.” American Journal of Sociology, 85: 840-869.

Ellickson, Robert, 1991, Order without Law, How Neighbors Settle Disputes. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Ellickson, Robert, 1998, “Law and Economics Discovers Social Norms.” Journal of Legal Studies, 27: 537-552.

Ellickson, Robert, 1999,“The Evolution of Social Norms: A Perspective from the Legal Academy.” Yale Law School, Program for Studies in Law, Economoics and Public Policy, Working Paper No.230.

Elster, Jon, 1978, Logic and Society, New York: Wiley.

Elster, Jon, 1989a, The Cement of Society. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Elster, Jon,1989b,“Social Norms and Economic Theory.” Journal of Economic Perspectives,3(4):99-117.

Fisher， Roger., W. Ury and B. Patton, 1991. Getting to Yes: Negotiating Agreement Without Giving in(2nd ed.). New York: Penguin.

Friedman, James, 1971,“A Non-cooperative Equilibrium for Supergame.” Review of Economic Studies, 38: 1-12.

Friedman, James, 1991, Game Theory with Applications to Economics, Oxford University Press.

Friedman, Daniel, 1998,“On economic applications of evolutionary game theory.” Journal of Evolutionary Economics, 8(1): 15-29.

Fudenberg, Drew and Jean Tirole, 1991, Game Theory, MIT Press.

Fuller, Lon L., 1964, The Morality of Law, Yale University Press.

Fuller, Lon L., 1981, The Principles of Social Order, Duke University Press.

Gambetta, Diego, 1993, The Sicilian Mafia: The Business of Private Protection，Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.

Gale,John, Kenneth Binmore and Larry Samuelson,1995,“Learning to be Imperfect: The Ultimatum Game.” Games and Economic Behavior,8: 56-90.

Gale, David and Lloyd Shapley, 1962, “College admissions and the stability of marriage.” American Mathematical Monthly, 69: 9-15.

Garg, D., Y. Naeahari and Sujit Gujar, 2008,“Foundations of mechanism design: A tutorial Part 1-Key concepts and classical results.” Sadhana,33(2):83-130.

Gibbons, Robert, 1992, A Primer in Game Theory, Harvester Wheatsheaf.

Gilson, Ronald J., 2001,“Globalizing Corporate Governance: Convergence of Form or Function.” The American Journal of Comparative Law, 49(2):329-357.

Glaeser, Edward and Claudia Goldin (eds), 2006, Corruption and Reform: Lessons from America's Economic History. The University of Chicago Press.

Gordon, Jeffrey and Mark Roe, 2004, Convergence and Persistence in Corporate Governance. Cambridge University Press.

Green, E. and R. Porter, 1984,“Noncooperative Collusion Under Imperfect Price Information.” Econometrica, 52:87-100.

Greif, Avner,1994,“Cultural Beliefs and the Organization of Society: A Historical and Theoretical Reflection on Collectivist and Individualist Societies.” The Journal of Political Economy,102(5): 912-950.

Groves, T., 1973, “Incentives in Teams.” Econometrica, 41: 617-631.

Groves, T. and J. Ledyard, 1977,“Optimal Allocation of Public Goods: A Solution to the ‘Free-Rider’ Problem.” Econometrica, 45: 783-809.

Grossman, S. and O. Hart, 1986,“The Costs and Benefits of Ownership: A Theory of Vertical and Lateral Integration.” Journal of Political Economy,94: 691-719.

Güth, W., Schmittberger, and Schwarze, 1982,“An Experimental Analysis of Ultimatum Bargaining.” Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization, 3(4): 367-388.

Hansmann, Henry, 1999,“Higher Education as An Associative Good.” working paper, Yale Law School.

Hansmann, Henry, 1999,“The State and Market in Higher Education.” working paper, Yale Law School.

Hard, O. and B. Holmstrom, 1987,“Theory of Contract.” In Advances in Economic Theory: Fifth World Congress, edited by T. Bewley, Cambridge University Press.

Harsanyi, J., 1973,“Games with Randomly Distributed Payoofs: A New Rationale for Mixed Strategic Equilibrium Points.” International Journal of Game Theory, 2:1-23.

Hayek, F.A., 1935,“The Present State of the Debate.” Collectivist Economic Planning, 201-243, Clifton: Augustus M. Kelly,1975; reprinted as “Socialist Calculation II: the State of the Debate”, Individualism and Economic Order, Chicago: Gateway Edition, 1972.

Hayek, F.A.,1937, “Economics and Knowledge.” Economica, 4: 33-54.

Hayek,F.A.,1945,“The Use of Knowledge in Society.” American Economic Review, 35(4): 519-530.

Hayek, F.A., 1960, The Constitution of Liberty. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul. (中文版：哈耶克,《自由秩序原理》（邓正来译），三联书店1997年版。)

Hayek, F.A., 1979, Law, Legislation and Liberty (three volumes). London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.

Heap, Shaun P. Hargreaves and Yanis Varoufakis, 1995, Game Theory: A Critical Introduction. Londond and New York: Routledge.

Held, David, 2006, Models of Democracy (third edition), Polity Press. (中文版：戴维·赫尔德,《民主的模式》，中央编译出版社2008年版。)

Holmstrom, B., 1979, “Moral Hazard and Observability.” Bell Journal of Economics,10: 74-91.

Holmstrom, B. and P. Milgrom, 1991,“Multi-task Principal-Agent Analyses: Incentive Contract, Asset Ownership and Job Design.” Journal of Law, Economics and Organization, 7: 24-52.

Honore Tony, 1987, Making Law Bind: Essays Legal and Philosophical, Clarendon Press Oxford.

Houba, Harold and Wilko Bolt, 2002, Credible Threats in Negotiation-A Game Theoretical Approach, Kluwer Academic Publishers, Boston.

Hulsmann, Jorg Guido, 2008, The Ethics of Money Production.(中文版：约尔格·吉多·许尔斯曼,《货币生产的伦理》，浙江大学出版社2010年版。)

Hume, David, 1740, A Treatise of Human Nature. 2nd Edition, Selby-Bigge, L.A. ed. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1978.

Hurwicz, L., 1960,“Optimality and informational efficiency in resource allocation processes.” In Mathematical Methods in the Social Sciences. Arrow, Karlin and Suppes(eds.), Stanford University Press.

Hurwicz, L., 1972,“On Informationally decentralized system.” Decision and Orgonization, edited by M. Mcguire and R. Radner, North Holland.

Ishiguro Shingo, 2004,“Collusion and discrimination in organizations.” Journal of Economic Theory, 116:357-369.

Jolls, Christine, Cass R. Sunstein, and Richard Thaler, 1998,“A Behavioral Approach to Law and Economics.” Stanford Law Review,50: 1471-1550.

Jussim, L., 1986,“Self-fullfilling prophecies: A theoretical and integrative review.” Psychological Review, 93(4): 429-445.

Kahn, Charles and Gur Huberman, 1988, “The Two-Sided Uncertaintty and ‘Up-or-Out’ Contract.” Journal of Labor Economics, 6: 423-44.

Kahneman, Daniel and Amos Tversky, 1979, “Prospect Theory: An Analysis of Decision under Risk.” Econometrica, 47: 263-291.

Kahneman, Daniel and Amos Tversky, 2000, Choices, Values and Frames, Cambridge University Press.

Kandori, Michihiro, 1992,“Social Norms and Community Enforcement.” Review of Economic Studies, 59: 61-80.

Kawasaki, S. and J. McMillan, 1987,“The Design of Contracts: Evidence from Japanese Subcontracting.” Journal of Japanese and International Economics 1: 1327-1349.

Kelson, Hans, 1967, Pure Theory of Law, The Regents of the University of California.(中文版：凯尔森著,沈宗灵译，《法和国家的一般理论》，中国大百科全书出版社1994年版。）

Klein, B. and K. Leffler, 1981,“The Role of Market Forces in Assuring Contractual Performance.” Journal of Political Economy, 81: 615-641.

Klein, Daniel (editor), 1997, Reputation: Studies in the Voluntary Elicitation of Good Conduct, The University of Michigan Press.

Klein, Daniel, 1997,“Trust for Hire: Voluntary Remedies for Quality and Safety.” in Reputation edited by Daniel Klein,University of Michigan Press.

Klemperer, Paul, 2004, Auction: Theory and Practice. Princeton University Press. (中文版：柯伦柏，《拍卖：理论与实践》，中国人民大学出版社2006年版。)

Knack, Stephen and Philip Keefer, 1997,“Does Social Capital Have An Economic Payoff？ A Cross-Country Investigation.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112(4):1251-1288.

Kreps. D., 1986,“Corporate Culture and Economic Theory.” in Technological Innovation and Business Strategy, edited by M. Tsuchiya, Nippon Keizai Shimbuunsha Press; also, in Rational Perspective on Political Science, edited by J. Alt and K. Shepsle, Harvard University Press, 1999.

Kreps D., 1990, A Course in Mircoeconomics, MIT Press.

Kreps D., R. Milgrom, J. Roberts and R. Wilson, 1982,“Rational Cooperation in the Finitely Tepeated Prisoners' Dilemma.” Journal of Economic Theory, 27: 245-252.

Kreps, D. and R. Wilson, 1982, “Sequential Equilibrium.” Econometrica, 50: 863-894.

Kuran, Timur, 1997, Private Truths, Public Lies: The Social Consequences of Preference Falsification, Harvard University Press.

Laffont, Jean-Jacques and Eric Maskin, 1979,“A differentiable approach to expected utility maximizing mechanism.” in Aggregation and Revelation of Preferences, edited by J. -J. Laffont, North Holland.

Laffont, Jean-Jacques and David Martimort, 2002, The Theory of Incentives: The Principal- Agent Model, Princeton University Press, (中译本:让雅克·拉丰、大卫·马赫蒂莫著，陈志俊译，《激励理论:委托-代理模型》，中国人民大学出版社2002年版。)

Lazear, E., 1989,“Pay Equality and Industrial Politics.” Journal of Political Economy， 97: 561-580.

Lazear, E., 1997, Personnel Economics, Cambridge, MA and London, England: MIT Press.

Lazear, E. and S. Rosen, 1981,“Rank-Order Tournaments as Optimum Labor Contracts.” Journal of Political Economy， 89(5): 841-864.

Levitt, Steven D. and Chad Syverson, 2005,“Market Distortions when Agents are Better Informed: The Value of Information in Real Estate Transactions.” NBER Working Paper Series No. 11053, National Bureau of Economic Research, 2005.

Liebowitz, Stan J. and Stephen E. Margolis, 1990,“The Fable of Keys.” Journal of Law and Economics, 33: 1-25. (收入丹尼尔·史普博(Daniel Spulber)编：《经济学的著名寓言》,英文版：2002年，Blackwell Publishers;中文版:2004年，上海人民出版社。）

Liebowitz, Stan J. and Stephen E. Margolis, 1999,“Beta, Macintosh amd other Famous Tales.” chapter 6 from Stan J. Liebowitz and Stephen E. Margolis, Winners, Losers and Microsoft,Oakland, CA: The Independent Institute, pp.199-234.(收入丹尼尔·史普博(Daniel Spulber)编,《经济学的著名寓言》,英文版：2002年，Blackwell Publishers;中文版:2004年，上海人民出版社。）

Lindbeck, Assar, 1975, Swedish Economic Policy. London: MacMillan Press.

Linster, Bruce G., 1992,“Evolutionary stability in the infinitely repeated Prisoners' Dilemma palyed by two-state Moore machines.” Southern Economic Journal, 58: 880-903.

Linster, Bruce G., 1994,“Stochastic evolutionary dynamics in the repeated Prisoners' Dilemma.” Economic Inquiry, 32: 342-357.

Mahoney, Paul G. and Chris William Sanchirico, 2003,“Norms, Repeated Games and the Role of Law.” California Law Review, 1: 1281-1329.

Maskin, Eric, 1977, Nash equilibrium and welfare optimality, mimeo.

Maskin, Eric, 1999,“Nash equilibrium and welfare optimality.” Review of Econnomic Studies, 66:23-38.

Maskin, Eric and J. Riley, 1984,“Optimal auction with risk averse buyers.” Econometrica 52: 1473-1518.

Maskin, Eric and J. Riley, 1985, “Auction theory with private value.” American Economic Review, 75: 150-155.

Maslow, A.H., 1943,“A Theory of Human Motivation.” Psychological Review, 50(4): 370-396.

Maslow, A.H.,1954, Motivation and Personality, New York: Harper.

Maynard Smith, and J. Price, G.R., 1973.“The logic of animal conflict.” Nature, 246 (5427): 15-18.

Maynard Smith, 1982, Evolution and Theory of Games. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

McAdams, Richard, 1997,“The Origin, Development and Regulation of Norms.” Michigan Law Review, 96(2): 238-433.

McPherson, Michael S. and Morton Owen Schapiro,1999,“Tenure Issues in Higher Education.” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 13(1):85-98.

Milgrom, P., 2004, Putting Auction Theory to Work. Cambridge University Press.

Milgrom, North and Weingast, 1990,“The Role of Institutions in the Revival of Trade: the Law Merchant, Private Judges, and the Champagne Fairs.” Econnomics and Politics, 2:1-23.

Milgrom, P. and J. Roberts, 1982,“Limit Pricing and Entry under Incomplete Information: An Equilibrium Analsys.” Econometrica,40: 433-459.

Milgrom, P. and J. Roberts, 1992, Economics, Organization and Management, Prentice Hall, Inc. (中文版：〔美〕保罗·米尔格罗姆、约翰·罗伯茨著，费方域译，《经济学、组织与管理》，经济科学出版社2004年版。)

Mirrlees, James, 1971,“An exploration in the theory of optimum income taxation.” Review of Economic Studies, 38: 175-208.

Mirrlees, James, 1975,“The Theory of Moral Hazard and Unobservable Behaviour: Part I.” mimeo, Nuffield College, Oxford. 正式发表于1999年，Review of Economic Studies,66(1): 3-21。

Mookherjee, Dilip, 1984, “Optimal Incentive Schemes with Many Agents.” Review of Economic Studies, 51(3): 433-446.

Morris, Ian, 2010, Why the West Rules for Now: The Patterns of History and What They Reveal about the Future, Profile Books.

Mueller, Dennis C., 2003, Public Choice III.Cambridge University Press.

Myers，Stewart C. and Nicolas Majluf, 1984,“Corporate financing and investment decisions when firms have information that investors do not have.” Journal of Financial Economics, 13: 187-222.

Myerson, R.,1979,“Incentive compatibility and the bargaining problem.” Econometrica 47: 61-73.

Myerson, R., 1983, “Mechanism design by informed principal, Econometrica, 51: 1767-1797.

Myerson, Roger, 1999,“Nash Equilibrium and the History of Economic Theory.” Journal of Economic Literature, 37(3): 1067-1082.

Myerson, R. and M. Satterthwaite, 1983,“Efficient mechanism for bilateral trading.” Journal of Economic Theory, 28: 265-281.

Nachbar, John H., 1992,“Evolution in the infinitely repeated Prisoners' Dilemma.” Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization, 19: 307-326.

Nalebuff, B. and J. Stiglitz, 1983,“Prizes and Incentives: Towards a General Theory of Compensation and Competition.” The Bell Journal of Economics, 14 (1): 21-43.

Nash, J., 1950, “The Bargaining Problem.” Econometrica, 18: 155-162.

Nash, J., 1951,“Non-cooperative Games.” Annals of Mathematics, 54: 286-295.

Nash, J., 1953, “Two-person cooperative games.” Econometrica, 21:128-140.

Nelson, P., 1974, “Advertising as Information.” Journal of Political Economy, 81: 729-754.

Nelson, R. and S. Winter, 1982, An Evolutionary Theory of Economic Change, Harvard University Press.

Nelson, Richard and Sidney Winter, 2002,“Evolutionary Theorizing in Economics.” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 16（2): 23-46.

Newman, J. Wilson, 1997(1956),“Dun and Bradstreet: For the Promotion and Protection of Trade.” repinted in Reputation edited by Daniel Klein,University of Michigan Press.

North, Douglass, 1990,Institutions,Institutional Change and Economic Performance, Cambridge University Press.

North, Douglass C. and Barry R. Weingast, 1989,“Consititutions and Commitment: the Evolution of Institutions Governing Public Choices in Seventeenth-Century England.” Journal of Economic History, 49: 803-832.

Oosterbeek, Hessel, Randolph Sloof, and Gijs van de Kuilen, 2004,“Cultural Differences in Ultimatum Game Experiments: Evidence from a Meta-Analysis.” Experimental Economics, 7(2): 171-188.

Orwell, George, 1946,“Politics and the English Language.”First published: Horizon. GB, London.

Ostrom, Elinor, 1990, Governing the Connmons,Cambridge University Press.

Posner, Eric, 1999,“A Theory of Contract Law under Conditions of radical Judicial Error.” John M. Olin Law and Economic Working Paper No.80, Chicago University.

Posner, Eric, 2000, Law and Social Norms. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Posner, Richard, 1980, “The Ethical and Political Basis of the Efficiency Norm in Common Law Adjudication.” Hofstra Law Review, 8: 487-507.

Posner, Richard,1983, The Economics of Justice, Harvard University Press.

Posner, Richard, 1992, Economic Analysis of Law, the 4th edition, Boston: Little, Brown.

Posner,Richard,1997,“Social Norms and the Law: An Economic Approach.” American Economic Review, 87(2): 365-369.

Prelec,Drazen and Duncan Simester, 2001,“Always Leave Home Without It: A Further Investigation of the Credit-Card Effect on Willingness to Pay”, Marketing Letters,12(1): 5-12.

Putnam, R., 1993, Making Democracy Work: Civic Traditions in Modern Italy. Princeton University Press.

Rasmusen, Eric, 1994, Game and Information: An Introduction to Game Theory, Cambridge: Blackwell Publisher.

Rasmusen, Eric, 2006, Games and Information (Fourth Edition). Oxford: Blackwell Publishers.

Rauch, James and Peter Evans, 2000,“Bureaucratic Structure and Bureaucratic Performance in Less Developed Countries.” Journal of Public Economics, 75(1): 49-71.

Rawls, John, 1971, A Theory of Justice, The Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, 1971.（中文版：约翰·罗尔斯著，何怀宏、何包钢、廖申白译，《正义论》，社会科学出版社2009年版。）

Rees, Ray, 1985,“The Theory of Principal and Agent: Part I.” Bulletin of Economic Research，37(1): 3-26.

Robson, Arthur J.,“Evolution and Human Nature.” Journal of Economic Perspectives， 16(2): 89-107.

Ross, Stephen A., 1977,“The Determination of Financial Structure: The Incentive Signaling Approach.” The Bell Journal of Economics， 8: 23-40.

Roth, Alvin E.,1979, Axiomatic Models of Bargaining, Lecture Notes in Economics and Mathematical Systems. Springer Verlag.

Roth, Alvin E., 1985, Game-Theoretic Models of Bargaining, Cambridge University Press.

Roth, Alvin E. and Marilda Sotomayor, 1990, Two-Sided Matching: A Study in Game-Theoretic Modeling and Analysis. Cambridge University Press.

Rothbard, Murray N.,1970, Power and Market, Ludwig Mises Institute. (中文版：《权力与市场》，新星出版社2007年版。)

Rothbard, Murray N., 2005, What Has Government Done for Our Money？ (fifth edition),Ludwig von Mises Institute.

Rothschild, M. and J. Stiglitz, 1976, “Equilibrium in Competitive Insurance Markets.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 90: 629-649.

Rubinstein, A., 1982, “Perfect Equilibrium in a Bargaining model.” Econometrica, 50:97-109.

Samuelson, Larry, 1997, Evolutionary Games and Equilibrium Selection, The MIT Press.

Samuelson, Larry, 2002, “Evolution and Game Theory.” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 16（2): 47-66.

Schelling, Thomas, 1960, Strategy of Conflict, Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Schelling, Thomas, 2006, Strategies of Commitment and other essays, Harvard University Press.

Schmalensee, R., 1978,“A Model of Advertising and Product Quality.” Journal of Political Economy, 6: 485-503.

Schmidt, Christian, 2004,“Are evolutionary games another way of thinking about game theory？: Some historical considerations.” Journal of Evolutionary Economics, 14(2):249-262.

Sealy, LS and RJA Hooley, 2009, Commercial Law: Text, Cases and Materials (4th edn), Oxford University Press.

Selten, R. 1965,“Spieltheoretiche Behandlung eines Oligopolmodells mit Nachfragetragheit.” Zeitschrift fur Gesamte Staatswissenschaft 121: 301-324.

Selten, R., 1975, “Re-examination of the Prefectness Concept for Equilibrium Points in Extensive Games.” International Journal of Game, 4: 25-55.

Selten, R., 1978, “The Chain-Store Paradox.” Theory and Decision, 9: 127-129.

Shapiro, Carl, A.Shaked, and J.Sutton, 1984, “Unvoluntary Umployment as a Perfect Equilibrium in a Bargaining Model.” Econometrica, 52: 1351-64.

Shapiro, Carl and Hal R. Varian, 1998, Information Rules: A Strategic Guide to the Network Economy. Harvard Business Press.

Shearmur, Jeremy and Daniel Klein, 1997,“Good Conduct in the Great Society: Adam Smith and the Role of Reputation.” in Klein (edit), Reputation: Studies in the Voluntary Elicitation of Good Conduct, The University of Michigan Press, 1997.

Shleifer, Andrei and Robert Vishny, 1998, Grabbing Hand: Government Pathologies and Their Cures, Harvard University Press. (中文版：《掠夺之手》，中信出版社2004年版。)

Simon, H., 1951,“A Formal Theory of Employment Relationship.” Econometrica, 19: 293-305.

Skoble, Aeon, 2006,“Hayek the philosopher of law.” The Cambridge Compaion to Hayek, edited by Edward Feser, Cambridge University Press.

Smith, Criag R., 1998, “Moon Cakes: Gifts That Keep on Giving and Giving...” Wall Street Journal, Sept. 30, p.1.

Sorkin, Andrew Ross, 2009, Too Big To Fail: The Inside Story of How Wall Street and Washington Fought to Save the Financial System from Crisis. Viking Adult Press.

Spence, A. M., 1973, “Job Market Signalling.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 87: 355-374.

Spence, A. M., 1974, Market Signaling, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Spence, M. and R. Zechhauser, 1971,“Insurance, Information and Individual Action.” American Economic Review (Papers and Proceedings), 61: 380-387.

Stark, Rodney, 1996, The Rise of Christianity, HarperOne.

Stark, Rodney, 2005， The Victory of Reason: How Christianity Led to Freedom, Capitalism and Western Success. Random House Trade Paperback.

Stigler, George, 1971, “The theory of economic regulation.” Bell Journal of Economics, 6:417-429.

Stiglitz, J.,1994, Whicher is Socialism？ Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Stiglitz, J. and A. Weiss, 1981,“Credit Rationing in Markets with Incomplete Information.” American Economic Review, 71: 393-410.

Sugden, Robert, 1989,“Spontaneous Order.” Journal of Economic Perspective, 3(4): 85-97.

Sugden, Robert, 2001,“The evolutionary turn in game theory.” Journal of Economic Methodology, 8(1): 113-130.

Sunstein, Cass, 1996, “Social Norms and Social Roles.” Columbia Law Review, 96(4): 903-968.

Svenson, Kakob, 2005,“Eight Questions about Corruption.” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 9(3): 19-42.

Tadelis, Steven, 1999,“What's in a Name？ Reputation as a Tradeable Asset.” American Economic Review, 89 (3): 549-563.

Thaler, R.H., 1988,“Anomalies: the Ultimatum Game.” Journal of Economic Perspective, 2: 195-206.

Tideman, T. N. and G. Tullock, 1976,“A New and Superior Process for Making Social Choices.” Journal of Political Economy, 84: 1145-1159.

Tirole, Jean, 1988, Theory of Industrial Organization, MIT Press.

Tirole, Jean, 1994,“The Internal Organization of Government.” Oxford Economic Papers, 46(1)：1-29.

Tocqueville, Alexis De, 2003(1835), Democracy in America, Penguin Book.

Tullock, Gordon, Arthur Seldon and Gordon Brady, 2002, Government Failure: A Primer in Public Choice. Washington: Cato Institute.

Tompkinson, Paul and Judy Bethwaite, 1995,“The Ultimatum Game: Raising Stakes.” Journal of Economic Organization and Behaviour, 27: 439-451.

Trakman, Leon F., 1983, The Law Merchant: The Evolution of Commercial Law, Fred B. Rothman Co. Littleton, Colorado.

Trivers, Robert, 1971,“The Evolution of Reciprocal Altruism.” Quarterly Review of Biology, 46(1): 35-57.

Tyler, Tom R., 1990, Why People Obey the Law, Yale University Press.

Van Rijckeghem, Caroline and Beatrice Weder, 2001,“Bureaucratic Corruption and the Rate of Temptation: Do Wages in the Civil Service Affect Corruption, and by How Much？” Journal of Development Economics, 65(2): 307-331.

Varian, Hal, 1989,“Price Discrimination.” Chapter 10 in R. Schmalensee and R. Willig (eds.) The Handbook of Industrial Organization, Vol.1, Amsterdan and New York: Elsevier Science Publishers B. V. (North-Holland), 597-654.

Vega-Redondo, Fernando, 2003, Economics and The Theory of Games. Cambridge University Press. 2003.

Vickers, John, 1986,“Signaling in a Model of Monetary Policy with Incomplete Information.” Oxford Economic Papers, 38: 443-455.

Vickery, William, 1961,“Counterspeculation, auctions and completely sealed tenders.” Journal of Finance, 16: 8-37.

Von Neumann, J. and O. Morgenstern, 1944, The Theory of Games and Economic Behaviour, Princeton University Press (Second Edition, 1947).

Walter, Barbara, 2003,“Explaining the Intractability of Territorial Conflict.” International Studies Review, 5(4):137-153.

Woods Jr., Thomas E., 2009, Meltdown, Regnery Publisher, Inc.

Yoshikawa,Toru and Abdul A. Rasheed, 2009,“Convergence of Corporate Governance: Critical Review and Future Directions.” Corporate Governance: An International Review, 17 (3): 388-404.

Young, H. Peyton, 1996,“The Economics of Convention.” Journal of Economic Perspective, 10(2): 105-122。

Young, H. Peyton, 1998, Individual Strategy and Social Structure. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Young, H. Peyton, 2008,“Social Norms.”in Steven N. Durlauf and Lawrence E. Blume(eds.), The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics (second edition). Palgrave Macmillan.

Zahavi, A., 1975, “Mate election-a selection for a handicap.” Journal of Theoretical Biology, 53: 205-214.

## 02. 中文部分

爱德华·威尔逊：《社会生物学——新的综合》，北京理工大学出版社2008年版。

陈登原：《国史旧闻》，中华书局2000年版。

陈寅恪：《审查报告三》，载冯友兰，《中国哲学史》（下），中华书局1961年版。

冯象：《腐败会不会成为一项权利？》，见《政法笔记》，江苏人民出版社2004年版。

冯友兰：《中国哲学史》（下），中华书局1961年版。

福山：《信任：社会道德和繁荣的创造》（中译本），远东出版社1998年版。

弗里德曼：《法律制度》（李琼英、林欣译），中国政法大学出版社1994年版。

何怀宏：《选举社会——秦汉至晚清社会形态研究》，北京大学出版社2011年版。

赫苏斯·韦尔塔·德索托（J. Huerta de Soto）：《社会主义：经济计算与企业家才能》，吉林出版集团有限责任公司2010年版。

霍布斯：《利维坦》，商务印书馆2009年版。

肯·宾默尔(K. Binmore)：《博弈论与社会契约》（王小卫, 钱勇译），上海财经大学出版社2003年版。

理查德·A.波斯纳（Richard A.Posner）：《法律的经济分析》（上），中国大百科全书出版社1994年版。

理查德·道金斯（Richard Dawkins)：《自私的基因》(卢允中,张岱云等译),吉林人民出版社1998年版。

洛克：《政府论》（下篇），商务印书馆2009年版。

李约瑟：《中国科学文明史》（1）（柯林·罗男改编），上海人民出版社2003年版。

梁治平：《清大习惯法：社会与国家》，中国政法大学出版社1996年版。

马克斯·韦伯：《新教伦理与资本主义精神》，江西人民出版社2010年版。

牟宗三：《政道与治道》，广西师范大学出版社2006年版。

佩里·罗杰斯(Perry Rogers)：《西方文明史：问题与源头》（潘惠霞等译），东北财经大学出版社2011年版。

沈颐（主编）:《燕园变法》，上海文化出版社2003年版。

丹尼尔·史普博(Daniel Spulber)编,《经济学的著名寓言：市场失灵的神话》，上海人民出版社2004年版。

苏珊·罗斯·艾克曼(Susan Rose-Ackerman)：《腐败与政府》（王江、程文浩译），新华出版社2000年版。

王成：《侵权损害的经济学分析》，中国人民大学出版社2002年版。

吴思：《隐蔽的秩序：拆解历史弈局》，海南出版社2004年。

熊彼特：《资本主义、社会主义与民主》，商务印书馆2009年版。

阎步克：《品位与职位：秦汉魏晋南北朝官阶制度研究》，中华书局2002年版。

阎步克：《士大夫政治演生史稿》，北京大学出版社1996年版。

姚中秋：《以作为一种制度变迁模式的“转型”》（1998），见《中国转型的理论分析——奥地利学派的视角》（罗卫东、姚中秋主编），浙江大学出版社2009年版。

姚中秋：《封建》（上册），海南出版社2012年版。

易中天：《我山之石》，广西师范大学出版社2009年版。

余英时：《中国文化史通释》，三联书店2012年版。

余英时：《试说科举在中国史上的功能与意义》，见余英时著，《中国文化通释》，三联书店2012年版。

约瑟夫·熊彼特：《资本主义、社会主义与民主》，商务印书馆2009年版。

约翰·密尔：《论自由》，商务印书馆2009年版。

张维迎：《企业的企业家-契约理论》，上海人民出版社1995年版。

张维迎：《博弈论与信息经济学》，上海人民出版社1996年版。

张维迎：《詹姆斯·莫里斯教授与信息经济学》，见张维迎编，《詹姆斯·莫里斯论文精选》，商务印书馆1997年版。

张维迎：《控制权损失的不可补偿性与国有企业兼并中的产权障碍》，《经济研究》，1998年第7期。

张维迎：《法律制度的信誉基础》，《经济研究》，2001年第1期。

张维迎：《企业家与职业经理人：如何建立信任》，《北京大学学报》（哲学社会科学版），2003年第10期。

张维迎：《大学的逻辑》，北京大学出版社2004年版，2005年增订版，2012年第三版。

张维迎：《产权、激励与公司治理》，经济科学出版社2005年版。

张维迎：《竞争力与企业成长》，北京大学出版社2006年版。

张维迎：《什么改变中国》，中信出版社2012年版。

张维迎：《市场的逻辑》（增订版），上海人民出版社2012年版。

张维迎、邓峰：《信息、激励与连带责任：对中国古代连坐、保甲制度的法和经济学分析》，《中国社会科学》，2003年第3期。

张维迎、柯荣住：《信任及其解释：来自中国的跨省调查分析》，《经济研究》，2002年第10期。

张维迎、柯荣住：《司法过程中的逆向选择》，《中国社会科学》，2002年第2期。

张五常：《蜜蜂的寓言》，《经济解释：张五常经济论文选》，商务印书馆2000年版，第133-161页。

郑也夫：《信任论》，中国广播电视出版社2001年版。

朱苏力：《法治及其本土资源》，中国政法大学出版社1996年版。

