# 0901

9

Electricity in the Atmosphere

9-1 The electric potential gradient of the atmosphereOn

an ordinary day over ﬂat desert country, or over the sea, as one goesupward from the surface of the ground the electric potential increases by about100 volts per meter. Thus there is a vertical electric ﬁeld E of 100 volts/m inthe air. The sign of the ﬁeld corresponds to a negative charge on the earth’ssurface. This means that outdoors the potential at the height of your nose is200 volts higher than the potential at your feet! You might ask:「Why don’t wejust stick a pair of electrodes out in the air one meter apart and use the 100 voltsto power our electric lights?」Or you might wonder:「If there is really a potentialdiﬀerence of 200 volts between my nose and my feet, why is it I don’t get a shockwhen I go out into the street?」

We will answer the second question ﬁrst. Your body is a relatively goodconductor. If you are in contact with the ground, you and the ground will tend tomake one equipotential surface. Ordinarily, the equipotentials are parallel to thesurface, as shown in Fig. 9-1(a), but when you are there, the equipotentials aredistorted, and the ﬁeld looks somewhat as shown in Fig. 9-1(b). So you still havevery nearly zero potential diﬀerence between your head and your feet. There arechargesthat come from the earth to your head, changing the ﬁeld. Some of themmay be discharged by ions collected from the air, but the current of these is verysmall because air is a poor conductor.

9-1 The electric potential gradient of

the atmosphere

9-2 Electric currents in the

atmosphere

9-3 Origin of the atmospheric

currents

9-4 Thunderstorms9-5 The mechanism of charge

separation9-6 Lightning

Reference: Chalmers, J. Alan, Atmo-spheric Electricity, Perga-mon Press, London (1957).

Fig. 9-1. (a) The potential distribution above the earth. (b) The potential

distribution near a man in an open ﬂat place.

How can we measure such a ﬁeld if the ﬁeld is changed by putting somethingthere? There are several ways. One way is to place an insulated conductor atsome distance above the ground and leave it there until it is at the same potentialas the air. If we leave it long enough, the very small conductivity in the air willlet the charges leak oﬀ (or onto) the conductor until it comes to the potential atits level. Then we can bring it back to the ground, and measure the shift of itspotential as we do so. A faster way is to let the conductor be a bucket of waterwith a small leak. As the water drops out, it carries away any excess chargesand the bucket will approach the same potential as the air. (The charges, as youknow, reside on the surface, and as the drops come oﬀ「pieces of surface」breakoﬀ.) We can measure the potential of the bucket with an electrometer.

9-1

There is another way to directly measure the potential gradient. Since thereis an electric ﬁeld, there is a surface charge on the earth (σ = 0E). If we placea ﬂat metal plate at the earth’s surface and ground it, negative charges appearon it (Fig. 9-2a). If this plate is now covered by another grounded conductingcover B, the charges will appear on the cover, and there will be no charges on theoriginal plate A. If we measure the charge that ﬂows from plate A to the ground(by, say, a galvanometer in the grounding wire) as we cover it, we can ﬁnd thesurface charge density that was there, and therefore also ﬁnd the electric ﬁeld.Having suggested how we can measure the electric ﬁeld in the atmosphere, wenow continue our description of it. Measurements show, ﬁrst of all, that the ﬁeldcontinues to exist, but gets weaker, as one goes up to high altitudes. By about50 kilometers, the ﬁeld is very small, so most of the potential change (the integralof E) is at lower altitudes. The total potential diﬀerence from the surface of theearth to the top of the atmosphere is about 400,000 volts.

9-2 Electric currents in the atmosphereAnother thing that can be measured, in addition to the potential gradient, isthe current in the atmosphere. The current density is small—about 10 micromi-croamperes crosses each square meter parallel to the earth. The air is evidentlynot a perfect insulator, and because of this conductivity, a small current—causedby the electric ﬁeld we have just been describing—passes from the sky down tothe earth.

Why does the atmosphere have conductivity? Here and there among the airmolecules there is an ion—a molecule of oxygen, say, which has acquired an extraelectron, or perhaps lost one. These ions do not stay as single molecules; becauseof their electric ﬁeld they usually accumulate a few other molecules around them.Each ion then becomes a little lump which, along with other lumps, drifts in theﬁeld—moving slowly upward or downward—making the observed current. Wheredo the ions come from? It was ﬁrst guessed that the ions were produced by theradioactivity of the earth. (It was known that the radiation from radioactivematerials would make air conducting by ionizing the air molecules.) Particles likeβ-rays coming out of the atomic nuclei are moving so fast that they tear electronsfrom the atoms, leaving ions behind. This would imply, of course, that if we wereto go to higher altitudes, we should ﬁnd less ionization, because the radioactivityis all in the dirt on the ground—in the traces of radium, uranium, potassium, etc.To test this theory, some physicists carried an experiment up in balloonsto measure the ionization of the air (Hess, in 1912) and discovered that theopposite was true—the ionization per unit volume increased with altitude! (Theapparatus was like that of Fig. 9-3. The two plates were charged periodically tothe potential V . Due to the conductivity of the air, the plates slowly discharged;the rate of discharge was measured with the electrometer.) This was a mostmysterious result—the most dramatic ﬁnding in the entire history of atmosphericelectricity. It was so dramatic, in fact, that it required a branching oﬀ of anentirely new subject—cosmic rays. Atmospheric electricity itself remained lessdramatic. Ionization was evidently being produced by something from outsidethe earth; the investigation of this source led to the discovery of the cosmicrays. We will not discuss the subject of cosmic rays now, except to say that theymaintain the supply of ions. Although the ions are being swept away all the time,new ones are being created by the cosmic-ray particles coming from the outside.To be precise, we must say that besides the ions made of molecules, there arealso other kinds of ions. Tiny pieces of dirt, like extremely ﬁne bits of dust, ﬂoatin the air and become charged. They are sometimes called「nuclei.」For example,when a wave breaks in the sea, little bits of spray are thrown into the air. Whenone of these drops evaporates, it leaves an inﬁnitesimal crystal of NaCl ﬂoatingin the air. These tiny crystals can then pick up charges and become ions; theyare called「large ions.」

The small ions—those formed by cosmic rays—are the most mobile. Becausethey are so small, they move rapidly through the air—with a speed of about9-2

Fig. 9-2. (a) A grounded metal plate willhave the same surface charge as the earth.(b) If the plate is covered with a groundedconductor it will have no surface charge.

Fig. 9-3. Measuring the conductivity of

air due to the motion of ions.

1 cm/sec in a ﬁeld of 100 volts/meter, or 1 volt/cm. The much bigger and heavierions move much more slowly. It turns out that if there are many「nuclei,」they willpick up the charges from the small ions. Then, since the「large ions」move so slowlyin a ﬁeld, the total conductivity is reduced. The conductivity of air, therefore, isquite variable, since it is very sensitive to the amount of「dirt」there is in it. Thereis much more of such dirt over land—where the winds can blow up dust or whereman throws all kinds of pollution into the air—than there is over water. It is notsurprising that from day to day, from moment to moment, from place to place,the conductivity near the earth’s surface varies enormously. The voltage gradientobserved at any particular place on the earth’s surface also varies greatly becauseroughly the same current ﬂows down from high altitudes in diﬀerent places, andthe varying conductivity near the earth results in a varying voltage gradient.

The conductivity of the air due to the drifting of ions also increases rapidlywith altitude—for two reasons. First of all, the ionization from cosmic raysincreases with altitude. Secondly, as the density of air goes down, the mean freepath of the ions increases, so that they can travel farther in the electric ﬁeld beforethey have a collision—resulting in a rapid increase of conductivity as one goes up.Although the electric current-density in the air is only a few micromicroam-peres per square meter, there are very many square meters on the earth’s surface.The total electric current reaching the earth’s surface at any time is very nearlyconstant at 1800 amperes. This current, of course, is「positive」—it carries pluscharges to the earth. So we have a voltage supply of 400,000 volts with a currentof 1800 amperes—a power of 700 megawatts!With such a large current coming down, the negative charge on the earthshould soon be discharged. In fact, it should take only about half an hour todischarge the entire earth. But the atmospheric electric ﬁeld has already lastedmore than a half-hour since its discovery. How is it maintained? What maintainsthe voltage? And between what and the earth? There are many questions.

The earth is negative, and the potential in the air is positive. If you go highenough, the conductivity is so great that horizontally there is no more chancefor voltage variations. The air, for the scale of times that we are talking about,becomes eﬀectively a conductor. This occurs at a height in the neighborhoodof 50 kilometers. This is not as high as what is called the「ionosphere,」inwhich there are very large numbers of ions produced by photoelectricity from thesun. Nevertheless, for our discussions of atmospheric electricity, the air becomessuﬃciently conductive at about 50 kilometers that we can imagine that there ispractically a perfect conducting surface at this height, from which the currentscome down. Our picture of the situation is shown in Fig. 9-4. The problem is:How is the positive charge maintained there? How is it pumped back? Becauseif it comes down to the earth, it has to be pumped back somehow. That was oneof the greatest puzzles of atmospheric electricity for quite a while.

Fig. 9-4. Typical electrical conditions in

a clear atmosphere.

Fig. 9-5. The average daily variation ofthe atmospheric potential gradient on a clearday over the oceans; referred to Greenwichtime.

Each piece of information we can get should give a clue or, at least, tellyou something about it. Here is an interesting phenomenon: If we measurethe current (which is more stable than the potential gradient) over the sea, forinstance, or in careful conditions, and average very carefully so that we get rid ofthe irregularities, we discover that there is still a daily variation. The average ofmany measurements over the oceans has a variation with time roughly as shownin Fig. 9-5. The current varies by about ±15 percent, and it is largest at 7:00 p.m.in London. The strange part of the thing is that no matter where you measurethe current—in the Atlantic Ocean, the Paciﬁc Ocean, or the Arctic Ocean—it isat its peak value when the clocks in London say 7:00 p.m.! All over the world thecurrent is at its maximum at 7:00 p.m. London time and it is at a minimum at4:00 a.m. London time. In other words, it depends upon the absolute time on theearth, not upon the local time at the place of observation. In one respect this is notmysterious; it checks with our idea that there is a very high conductivity laterallyat the top, because that makes it impossible for the voltage diﬀerence from theground to the top to vary locally. Any potential variations should be worldwide,as indeed they are. What we now know, therefore, is that the voltage at the「top」surface is dropping and rising by 15 percent with the absolute time on the earth.9-3

9-3 Origin of the atmospheric currentsWe must next talk about the source of the large negative currents whichmust be ﬂowing from the「top」to the surface of the earth to keep charging itup negatively. Where are the batteries that do this? The「battery」is shown inFig. 9-6. It is the thunderstorm and its lightning. It turns out that the bolts oflightning do not「discharge」the potential we have been talking about (as youmight at ﬁrst guess). Lightning storms carry negative charges to the earth. Whena lightning bolt strikes, nine times out of ten it brings down negative charges tothe earth in large amounts. It is the thunderstorms throughout the world thatare charging the earth with an average of 1800 amperes, which is then beingdischarged through regions of fair weather.

There are about 40,000 thunderstorms per day all over the earth, and wecan think of them as batteries pumping the electricity to the upper layer andmaintaining the voltage diﬀerence. Then take into account the geography of theearth—there are thunderstorms in the afternoon in Brazil, tropical thunderstormsin Africa, and so forth. People have made estimates of how much lightning isstriking world-wide at any time, and perhaps needless to say, their estimatesmore or less agree with the voltage diﬀerence measurements: the total amountof thunderstorm activity is highest on the whole earth at about 7:00 p.m. inLondon. However, the thunderstorm estimates are very diﬃcult to make and weremade only after it was known that the variation should have occurred. Thesethings are very diﬃcult because we don’t have enough observations on the seasand over all parts of the world to know the number of thunderstorms accurately.But those people who think they「do it right」obtain the result that there areabout 100 lightning ﬂashes per second world-wide with a peak in the activity at7:00 p.m. Greenwich Mean Time.

Fig. 9-6. The mechanism that generates atmospheric electric ﬁeld. [Photo by William L. Widmayer.]

9-4

In order to understand how these batteries work, we will look at a thunderstormin detail. What is going on inside a thunderstorm? We will describe this insofaras it is known. As we get into this marvelous phenomenon of real nature—insteadof the idealized spheres of perfect conductors inside of other spheres that we cansolve so neatly—we discover that we don’t know very much. Yet it is really quiteexciting. Anyone who has been in a thunderstorm has enjoyed it, or has beenfrightened, or at least has had some emotion. And in those places in nature wherewe get an emotion, we ﬁnd that there is generally a corresponding complexityand mystery about it. It is not going to be possible to describe exactly how athunderstorm works, because we do not yet know very much. But we will try todescribe a little bit about what happens.

9-4 ThunderstormsIn the ﬁrst place, an ordinary thunderstorm is made up of a number of「cells」fairly close together, but almost independent of each other. So it is best toanalyze one cell at a time. By a「cell」we mean a region with a limit area in thehorizontal direction in which all of the basic processes occur. Usually there areseveral cells side by side, and in each one about the same thing is happening,although perhaps with a diﬀerent timing. Figure 9-7 indicates in an idealizedfashion what such a cell looks like in the early stage of the thunderstorm. It turnsout that in a certain place in the air, under certain conditions which we shalldescribe, there is a general rising of the air, with higher and higher velocitiesnear the top. As the warm, moist air at the bottom rises, it cools and the watervapor in it condenses. In the ﬁgure the little stars indicate snow and the dotsindicate rain, but because the updraft currents are great enough and the dropsare small enough, the snow and rain do not come down at this stage. This is thebeginning stage, and not the real thunderstorm yet—in the sense that we don’thave anything happening at the ground. At the same time that the warm airrises, there is an entrainment of air from the sides—an important point whichwas neglected for many years. Thus it is not just the air from below which isrising, but also a certain amount of other air from the sides.

Why does the air rise like this? As you know, when you go up in altitudethe air is colder. The ground is heated by the sun, and the re-radiation of heatto the sky comes from water vapor high in the atmosphere; so at high altitudesthe air is cold—very cold—whereas lower down it is warm. You may say,「Thenit’s very simple. Warm air is lighter than cold; therefore the combination ismechanically unstable and the warm air rises.」Of course, if the temperatureis diﬀerent at diﬀerent heights, the air is unstable thermodynamically. Left toitself inﬁnitely long, the air would all come to the same temperature. But it isnot left to itself; the sun is always shining (during the day). So the problem isindeed not one of thermodynamic equilibrium, but of mechanical equilibrium.Suppose we plot—as in Fig. 9-8—the temperature of the air against height abovethe ground. In ordinary circumstances we would get a decrease along a curvelike the one labeled (a); as the height goes up, the temperature goes down. Howcan the atmosphere be stable? Why doesn’t the hot air below simply rise upinto the cold air? The answer is this: if the air were to go up, its pressure wouldgo down, and if we consider a particular parcel of air going up, it would beexpanding adiabatically. (There would be no heat coming in or out because inthe large dimensions considered here, there isn’t time for much heat ﬂow.) Thusthe parcel of air would cool as it rises. Such an adiabatic process would give atemperature-height relationship like curve (b) in Fig. 9-8. Any air which rosefrom below would be colder than the environment it goes into. Thus there is noreason for the hot air below to rise; if it were to rise, it would cool to a lowertemperature than the air already there, would be heavier than the air there, andwould just want to come down again. On a good, bright day with very littlehumidity there is a certain rate at which the temperature in the atmosphere falls,and this rate is, in general, lower than the「maximum stable gradient,」which isrepresented by curve (b). The air is in stable mechanical equilibrium.

9-5

Fig. 9-7. A thunderstorm cell in the earlystages of development. [From U.S. Depart-ment of Commerce Weather Bureau Report,June 1949.]

Fig. 9-8. Atmospheric

temperature.(a) Static atmosphere; (b) adiabatic coolingof dry air; (c) adiabatic cooling of wet air;(d) wet air with some mixing of ambient air.

Fig. 9-9. A mature thunderstorm cell.[From U.S. Department of CommerceWeather Bureau Report, June 1949.]

On the other hand, if we think of a parcel of air that contains a lot of watervapor being carried up into the air, its adiabatic cooling curve will be diﬀerent.As it expands and cools, the water vapor in it will condense, and the condensingwater will liberate heat. Moist air, therefore, does not cool nearly as much as dryair does. So if air that is wetter than the average starts to rise, its temperaturewill follow a curve like (c) in Fig. 9-8. It will cool oﬀ somewhat, but will stillbe warmer than the surrounding air at the same level. If we have a region ofwarm moist air and something starts it rising, it will always ﬁnd itself lighter andwarmer than the air around it and will continue to rise until it gets to enormousheights. This is the machinery that makes the air in the thunderstorm cell rise.For many years the thunderstorm cell was explained simply in this manner.But then measurements showed that the temperature of the cloud at diﬀerentheights was not nearly as high as indicated by curve (c). The reason is that asthe moist air「bubble」goes up, it entrains air from the environment and is cooledoﬀ by it. The temperature-versus-height curve looks more like curve (d), whichis much closer to the original curve (a) than to curve (c).

After the convection just described gets under way, the cross section ofa thunderstorm cell looks like Fig. 9-9. We have what is called a「mature」thunderstorm. There is a very rapid updraft which, in this stage, goes up toabout 10,000 to 15,000 meters—sometimes even much higher. The thunderheads,with their condensation, climb way up out of the general cloud bank, carried byan updraft that is usually about 60 miles an hour. As the water vapor is carriedup and condenses, it forms tiny drops which are rapidly cooled to temperaturesbelow zero degrees. They should freeze, but do not freeze immediately—theyare「supercooled.」Water and other liquids will usually cool well below theirfreezing points before crystallizing if there are no「nuclei」present to start thecrystallization process. Only if there is some small piece of material present, likea tiny crystal of NaCl, will the water drop freeze into a little piece of ice. Thenthe equilibrium is such that the water drops evaporate and the ice crystals grow.Thus at a certain point there is a rapid disappearance of the water and a rapidbuildup of ice. Also, there may be direct collisions between the water drops andthe ice—collisions in which the supercooled water becomes attached to the icecrystals, which causes it to suddenly crystallize. So at a certain point in thecloud expansion there is a rapid accumulation of large ice particles.

When the ice particles are heavy enough, they begin to fall through the risingair—they get too heavy to be supported any longer in the updraft. As they comedown, they draw a little air with them and start a downdraft. And surprisinglyenough, it is easy to see that once the downdraft is started, it will maintain itself.The air now drives itself down!

Notice that the curve (d) in Fig. 9-8 for the actual distribution of temperaturein the cloud is not as steep as curve (c), which applies to wet air. So if wehave wet air falling, its temperature will drop with the slope of curve (c) andwill go below the temperature of the environment if it gets down far enough, asindicated by curve (e) in the ﬁgure. The moment it does that, it is denser thanthe environment and continues to fall rapidly. You say,「That is perpetual motion.First, you argue that the air should rise, and when you have it up there, youargue equally well that the air should fall.」But it isn’t perpetual motion. Whenthe situation is unstable and the warm air should rise, then clearly somethinghas to replace the warm air. It is equally true that cold air coming down wouldenergetically replace the warm air, but you realize that what is coming down isnot the original air. The early arguments, that had a particular cloud withoutentrainment going up and then coming down, had some kind of a puzzle. Theyneeded the rain to maintain the downdraft—an argument which is hard to believe.As soon as you realize that there is a lot of original air mixed in with the risingair, the thermodynamic argument shows that there can be a descent of the coldair which was originally at some great height. This explains the picture of theactive thunderstorm sketched in Fig. 9-9.

As the air comes down, rain begins to come out of the bottom of the thun-derstorm. In addition, the relatively cold air spreads out when it arrives at the9-6

earth’s surface. So just before the rain comes there is a certain little cold windthat gives us a forewarning of the coming storm. In the storm itself there arerapid and irregular gusts of air, there is an enormous turbulence in the cloud,and so on. But basically we have an updraft, then a downdraft—in general, avery complicated process.

The moment at which precipitation starts is the same moment that the largedowndraft begins and is the same moment, in fact, when the electrical phenomenaarise. Before we describe lightning, however, we can ﬁnish the story by lookingat what happens to the thunderstorm cell after about one-half an hour to anhour. The cell looks as shown in Fig. 9-10. The updraft stops because there isno longer enough warm air to maintain it. The downward precipitation continuesfar a while, the last little bits of water come out, and things get quieter andquieter—although there are small ice crystals left way up in the air. Becausethe winds at very great altitude are in diﬀerent directions, the top of the cloudusually spreads into an anvil shape. The cell comes to the end of its life.

Fig. 9-10. The late phase of a thunderstorm cell.[From U.S. Department of Commerce Weather Bu-reau Report, June 1949.]

Fig. 9-11. The distribution of electrical charges in a mature[From U.S. Department of Commerce

thunderstorm cell.Weather Bureau Report, June 1949.]

9-5 The mechanism of charge separationWe want now to discuss the most important aspect for our purposes—thedevelopment of the electrical charges. Experiments of various kinds—includingﬂying airplanes through thunderstorms (the pilots who do this are brave men!)—tell us that the charge distribution in a thunderstorm cell is something like thatshown in Fig. 9-11. The top of the thunderstorm has a positive charge, and thebottom a negative one—except for a small local region of positive charge in thebottom of the cloud, which has caused everybody a lot of worry. No one seems toknow why it is there, how important it is—whether it is a secondary eﬀect of thepositive rain coming down, or whether it is an essential part of the machinery.Things would be much simpler if it weren’t there. Anyway, the predominantlynegative charge at the bottom and the positive charge at the top have the correctsign for the battery needed to drive the earth negative. The positive charges are 6or 7 kilometers up in the air, where the temperature is about −20◦C, whereas thenegative charges are 3 or 4 kilometers high, where the temperature is betweenzero and −10◦C.

9-7

The charge at the bottom of the cloud is large enough to produce potentialdiﬀerences of 20, or 30, or even 100 million volts between the cloud and theearth—much bigger than the 0.4 million volts from the「sky」to the ground in aclear atmosphere. These large voltages break down the air and create giant arcdischarges. When the breakdown occurs the negative charges at the bottom ofthe thunderstorm are carried down to the earth in the lightning strokes.

Now we will describe in some detail the character of the lightning. Firstof all, there are large voltage diﬀerences around, so that the air breaks down.There are lightning strokes between one piece of a cloud and another piece ofa cloud, or between one cloud and another cloud, or between a cloud and theearth. In each of the independent discharge ﬂashes—the kind of lightning strokesyou see there are approximately 20 or 30 coulombs of charge brought down.One question is: How long does it take for the cloud to regenerate the 20 or30 coulombs which are taken away by the lightning bolt? This can be seen bymeasuring, far from a cloud, the electric ﬁeld produced by the cloud’s dipolemoment. In such measurements you see a sudden decrease in the ﬁeld when thelightning strikes, and then an exponential return to the previous value with atime constant which is slightly diﬀerent for diﬀerent cases but which is in theneighborhood of 5 seconds. It takes a thunderstorm only 5 seconds after eachlightning stroke to build its charge up again. That doesn’t necessarily meanthat another stroke is going to occur in exactly 5 seconds every time, because,of course, the geometry is changed, and so on. The strokes occur more or lessirregularly, but the important point is that it takes about 5 seconds to recreatethe original condition. Thus there are approximately 4 amperes of current inthe generating machine of the thunderstorm. This means that any model madeto explain how this storm generates its electricity must be one with plenty ofjuice—it must be a big, rapidly operating device.

Before we go further we shall consider something which is almost certainlycompletely irrelevant, but nevertheless interesting, because it does show the eﬀectof an electric ﬁeld on water drops. We say that it may be irrelevant because itrelates to an experiment one can do in the laboratory with a stream of waterto show the rather strong eﬀects of the electric ﬁeld on drops of water. In athunderstorm there is no stream of water; there is a cloud of condensing ice anddrops of water. So the question of the mechanisms at work in a thunderstormis probably not at all related to what you can see in the simple experiment wewill describe. If you take a small nozzle connected to a water faucet and direct itupward at a steep angle, as in Fig. 9-12, the water will come out in a ﬁne streamthat eventually breaks up into a spray of ﬁne drops. If you now put an electricﬁeld across the stream at the nozzle (by bringing up a charged rod, for example),the form of the stream will change. With a weak electric ﬁeld you will ﬁnd thatthe stream breaks up into a smaller number of large-sized drops. But if you applya stronger ﬁeld, the stream breaks up into many, many ﬁne drops—smaller thanbefore.* With a weak electric ﬁeld there is a tendency to inhibit the breakup ofthe stream into drops. With a stronger ﬁeld, however, there is an increase in thetendency to separate into drops.

The explanation of these eﬀects is probably the following. If we have thestream of water coming out of the nozzle and we put a small electric ﬁeld acrossit one side of the water gets slightly positive and the other side gets slightlynegative. Then, when the stream breaks, the drops on one side may be positive,and those on the other side may be negative. They will attract each other andwill have a tendency to stick together more than they would have before—thestream doesn’t break up as much. On the other hand, if the ﬁeld is stronger, thecharge in each one of the drops gets much larger, and there is a tendency forthe charge itself to help break up the drops through their own repulsion. Eachdrop will break into many smaller ones, each carrying a charge, so that they areall repelled, and spread out so rapidly. So as we increase the ﬁeld, the stream

* A handy way to observe the sizes of the drops is to let the stream fall on a large thin

metal plate. The larger drops make a louder noise.

9-8

Fig. 9-12. A jet of water with an electric

ﬁeld near the nozzle.

becomes more ﬁnely separated. The only point we wish to make is that in certaincircumstances electric ﬁelds can have considerable inﬂuence on the drops. Theexact machinery by which something happens in a thunderstorm is not at allknown, and is not at all necessarily related to what we have just described. Wehave included it just so that you will appreciate the complexities that could comeinto play. In fact, nobody has a theory applicable to clouds based on that idea.We would like to describe two theories which have been invented to account forthe separation of the charges in a thunderstorm. All the theories involve the ideathat there should be some charge on the precipitation particles and a diﬀerentcharge in the air. Then by the movement of the precipitation particles—thewater or the ice—through the air there is a separation of electric charge. Theonly question is: How does the charging of the drops begin? One of the oldertheories is called the「breaking-drop」theory. Somebody discovered that if youhave a drop of water that breaks into two pieces in a windstream, there is positivecharge on the water and negative charge in the air. This breaking-drop theoryhas several disadvantages, among which the most serious is that the sign is wrong.Second, in the large number of temperate-zone thunderstorms which do exhibitlightning, the precipitation eﬀects at high altitudes are in ice, not in water.From what we have just said, we note that if we could imagine some wayfor the charge to be diﬀerent at the top and bottom of a drop and if we couldalso see some reason why drops in a high-speed airstream would break up intounequal pieces—a large one in the front and a smaller one in the back because ofthe motion through the air or something—we would have a theory. (Diﬀerentfrom any known theory!) Then the small drops would not fall through the airas fast as the big ones, because of the air resistance, and we would get a chargeseparation. You see, it is possible to concoct all kinds of possibilities.

One of the more ingenious theories, which is more satisfactory in many respectsthan the breaking-drop theory, is due to C. T. R. Wilson. We will describe it,as Wilson did, with reference to water drops, although the same phenomenonwould also work with ice. Suppose we have a water drop that is falling in theelectric ﬁeld of about 100 volts per meter toward the negatively charged earth.The drop will have an induced dipole moment—with the bottom of the droppositive and the top of the drop negative, as drawn in Fig. 9-13. Now there arein the air the「nuclei」that we mentioned earlier—the large slow-moving ions.(The fast ions do not have an important eﬀect here.) Suppose that as a dropcomes down, it approaches a large ion. If the ion is positive, it is repelled by thepositive bottom of the drop and is pushed away. So it does not become attachedto the drop. If the ion were to approach from the top, however, it might attachto the negative, top side. But since the drop is falling through the air, thereis an air drift relative to it, going upwards, which carries the ions away if theirmotion through the air is slow enough. Thus the positive ions cannot attach atthe top either. This would apply, you see, only to the large, slow-moving ions.The positive ions of this type will not attach themselves either to the front orthe back of a falling drop. On the other hand, as the large, slow, negative ionsare approached by a drop, they will be attracted and will be caught. The dropwill acquire negative charge—the sign of the charge having been determined bythe original potential diﬀerence on the entire earth—and we get the right sign.Negative charge will be brought down to the bottom part of the cloud by thedrops, and the positively charged ions which are left behind will be blown to thetop of the cloud by the various updraft currents. The theory looks pretty good,and it at least gives the right sign. Also it doesn’t depend on having liquid drops.We will see, when we learn about polarization in a dielectric, that pieces of icewill do the same thing. They also will develop positive and negative charges ontheir extremities when they are in an electric ﬁeld.

There are, however, some problems even with this theory. First of all, thetotal charge involved in a thunderstorm is very high. After a short time, thesupply of large ions would get used up. So Wilson and others have had to proposethat there are additional sources of the large ions. Once the charge separationstarts, very large electric ﬁelds are developed, and in these large ﬁelds there may9-9

Fig. 9-13. C. T. R. Wilson’s theory of

charge separation in a thundercloud.

be places where the air will become ionized. If there is a highly charged point,or any small object like a drop, it may concentrate the ﬁeld enough to make a「brush discharge.」When there is a strong enough electric ﬁeld—let us say it ispositive—electrons will fall into the ﬁeld and will pick up a lot of speed betweencollisions. Their speed will be such that in hitting another atom they will tearelectrons oﬀ at that atom, leaving positive charges behind. These new electronsalso pick up speed and collide with more electrons. So a kind of chain reaction oravalanche occurs, and there is a rapid accumulation of ions. The positive chargesare left near their original positions, so the net eﬀect is to distribute the positivecharge on the point into a region around the point. Then, of course, there isno longer a strong ﬁeld, and the process stops. This is the character of a brushdischarge. It is possible that the ﬁelds may become strong enough in the cloudto produce a little bit of brush discharge; there may also be other mechanisms,once the thing is started, to produce a large amount of ionization. But nobodyknows exactly how it works. So the fundamental origin of lightning is really notthoroughly understood. We know it comes from the thunderstorms. (And weknow, of course, that thunder comes from the lightning—from the thermal energyreleased by the bolt.)

At least we can understand, in part, the origin of atmospheric electricity. Dueto the air currents, ions, and water drops on ice particles in a thunderstorm,positive and negative charges are separated. The positive charges are carriedupward to the top of the cloud (see Fig. 9-11), and the negative charges aredumped into the ground in lightning strokes. The positive charges leave the topof the cloud, enter the high-altitude layers of more highly conducting air, andspread throughout the earth. In regions of clear weather, the positive charges inthis layer are slowly conducted to the earth by the ions in the air—ions formedby cosmic rays, by the sea, and by man’s activities. The atmosphere is a busyelectrical machine!

9-6 LightningThe ﬁrst evidence of what happens in a lightning stroke was obtained inphotographs taken with a camera held by hand and moved back and forth withthe shutter open—while pointed toward a place where lightning was expected.The ﬁrst photographs obtained this way showed clearly that lightning strokes areusually multiple discharges along the same path. Later, the「Boys」camera, whichhas two lenses mounted 180◦ apart on a rapidly rotating disc, was developed.The image made by each lens moves across the ﬁlm—the picture is spread out intime. If, for instance, the stroke repeats, there will be two images side by side.By comparing the images of the two lenses, it is possible to work out the detailsof the time sequence of the ﬂashes. Figure 9-14 shows a photograph taken witha「Boys」camera.

We will now describe the lightning. Again, we don’t understand exactly howit works. We will give a qualitative description of what it looks like, but we won’tgo into any details of why it does what it appears to do. We will describe only theordinary case of the cloud with a negative bottom over ﬂat country. Its potentialis much more negative than the earth underneath, so negative electrons will beaccelerated toward the earth. What happens is the following. It all starts with athing called a「step leader,」which is not as bright as the stroke of lightning. Onthe photographs one can see a little bright spot at the beginning that starts fromthe cloud and moves downward very rapidly—at a sixth of the speed of light!It goes only about 50 meters and stops. It pauses for about 50 microseconds,and then takes another step. It pauses again and then goes another step, andso on. It moves in a series of steps toward the ground, along a path like thatshown in Fig. 9-15. In the leader there are negative charges from the cloud; thewhole column is full of negative charge. Also, the air is becoming ionized by therapidly moving charges that produce the leader, so the air becomes a conductoralong the path traced out. The moment the leader touches the ground, we havea conducting「wire」that runs all the way up to the cloud and is full of negative9-10

Fig. 9-14. Photograph of a lightning ﬂashtaken with a「Boys」camera. [From Schon-land, Malan, and Collens, Proc. Roy. Soc.London, Vol. 152 (1935).

charge. Now, at last, the negative charge of the cloud can simply escape andrun out. The electrons at the bottom of the leader are the ﬁrst ones to realizethis; they dump out, leaving positive charge behind that attracts more negativecharge from higher up in the leader, which in its turn pours out, etc. So ﬁnallyall the negative charge in a part of the cloud runs out along the column in arapid and energetic way. So the lightning stroke you see runs upwards from theground, as indicated in Fig. 9-16. In fact, this main stroke—by far the brightestpart—is called the return stroke. It is what produces the very bright light, andthe heat, which by causing a rapid expansion of the air makes the thunder clap.The current in a lightning stroke is about 10,000 amperes at its peak, and itBut we are still not ﬁnished. After a time of, perhaps, a few hundredths ofa second, when the return stroke has disappeared, another leader comes down.But this time there are no pauses. It is called a「dart leader」this time, and itgoes all the way down—from top to bottom in one swoop. It goes full steam onexactly the old track, because there is enough debris there to make it the easiestroute. The new leader is again full of negative charge. The moment it touchesthe ground—zing!—there is a return stroke going straight up along the path. Soyou see the lightning strike again, and again, and again. Sometimes it strikesonly once or twice, sometimes ﬁve or ten times—once as many as 42 times onthe same track was seen—but always in rapid succession.

carries down about 20 coulombs.

Sometimes things get even more complicated. For instance, after one of itspauses the leader may develop a branch by sending out two steps—both towardthe ground but in somewhat diﬀerent directions, as shown in Fig. 9-15. Whathappens then depends on whether one branch reaches the ground deﬁnitelybefore the other. If that does happen, the bright return stroke (of negative chargedumping into the ground) works its way up along the branch that touches theground, and when it reaches and passes the branching point on its way up tothe cloud, a bright stroke appears to go down the other branch. Why? Becausenegative charge is dumping out and that is what lights up the bolt. This chargebegins to move at the top of the secondary branch, emptying successive, longerpieces of the branch, so the bright lightning bolt appears to work its way downthat branch, at the same time as it works up toward the cloud. If, however,one of these extra leader branches happens to have reached the ground almostsimultaneously with the original leader, it can sometimes happen that the dartleader of the second stroke will take the second branch. Then you will see theﬁrst main ﬂash in one place and the second ﬂash in another place. It is a variantof the original idea.

Also, our description is oversimpliﬁed for the region very near the ground.When the step leader gets to within a hundred meters or so from the ground,there is evidence that a discharge rises from the ground to meet it. Presumably,the ﬁeld gets big enough for a brush-type discharge to occur. If, for instance,there is a sharp object, like a building with a point at the top, then as the leadercomes down nearby the ﬁelds are so large that a discharge starts from the sharppoint and reaches up to the leader. The lightning tends to strike such a point.It has apparently been known for a long time that high objects are struck bylightning. There is a quotation of Artabanus, the advisor to Xerxes, giving hismaster advice on a contemplated attack on the Greeks—during Xerxes’ campaignto bring the entire known world under the control of the Persians. Artabanussaid,「See how God with his lightning always smites the bigger animals and willnot suﬀer them to wax insolent, while these of a lesser bulk chafe him not. Howlikewise his bolts fall ever on the highest houses and tallest trees.」And then heexplains the reason:「So, plainly, doth he love to bring down everything thatexalts itself.」

Do you think—now that you know a true account of lightning striking talltrees—that you have a greater wisdom in advising kings on military matters thandid Artabanus 2400 years ago? Do not exalt yourself. You could only do it lesspoetically.

9-11

Fig. 9-15. The formation of the「stepleader.」

Fig. 9-16. The return lightning strokeruns back up the path made by the leader.

10-1 The dielectric constant10-2 The polarization vector P10-3 Polarization charges10-4 The electrostatic equations with

dielectrics

10-5 Fields and forces with dielectrics

10

Dielectrics

