## 记忆时间

## 卡片

### 0101. 反常识卡——

这本书的主题核心，就是最大的反常识卡，并且注意时间脉络。

常识：

反常识：

知识来源：比如提出者，如何演化成型的；书或专栏具体出现的地方。

例子。

### 0201. 术语卡——

根据反常识，再补充三个证据——就产生三张术语卡。

例子。

### 0202. 术语卡——

### 0203. 术语卡——

### 0301. 人名卡——

根据这些证据和案例，找出源头和提出术语的人是谁——产生一张人名卡，并且分析他为什么牛，有哪些作品，生平经历是什么。

维基百科链接：有的话。

#### 01. 出生日期

用一句话描述你对这个大牛的印象。

#### 02. 贡献及经历

#### 03. 论文及书籍

#### 04. 演讲汇总

找一个他的 TED 演讲，有的话。

### 0401. 金句卡——

最后根据他写的非常震撼的话语——产生一张金句卡。

### 0501. 行动卡——

行动卡是能够指导自己的行动的卡。

### 0601. 任意卡——

最后还有一张任意卡，记录个人阅读感想。

## 模板

### 1. 逻辑脉络

用自己的话总结主题，梳理逻辑脉络，也就是在这个专栏的整个地图里，这一章节所在的节点。

### 2. 摘录及评论

1『自己的观点』

2『行动指南』

3『与其他知识的连接』

## 20191027Can-marketplace-science-be-trusted

Henry rejected the efforts to remove Silliman. More importantly, he resolved to expand the NAS membership; new members were to be judged on the basis of their research, not on the source of their income 1. By the 1870s, it was already clear that industry relied on science.

1『非但没开出 Silliman，还借此扩员，揭示了工业与科学的结合。』

The Silliman-Whitney controversy marked a watershed in the relationship between science and industry. For US scientists, as well as many in Britain and Europe, private companies had become valuable patrons, supplying both funds for research and problems to be researched, and were gainful employers who provided short-term commissions. Likewise, companies regarded scientists and their findings as profitable to the development of their respective industries.

Over the next 150 years, relations between science and industry continued to evolve — in four significant stages. 

1. Consultancy (1820–80)

2. Industry (1880–1940)

3. Military (1940–80)

4. Outsourcing (1980 on)

The profession of scientific consulting goes back to the early nineteenth century, when individuals or groups of capitalists occasionally commissioned scientists to examine prospects in farming, mining, transportation (canals and railroads) and manufacturing. These fee-for-expertise engagements were short term and advisory. By the 1870s, changes in US commercial law (similar to those in British and European law) allowed the formation of limited-liability, joint-stock companies. These businesses, with their large pools of funds and numerous shareholders looking for investment assurances, regularly consulted scientists. As the engagements became both more routine (continuous testing and analysing of existing products and processes) and more investigative, scientists began to receive lucrative contracts and retainers 1.

In the United States, geologists were among the most active consultants during the Gilded Age, a period of rapid economic growth from the 1870s to the 1890s, especially in precious-metal mining in the area west of the Mississippi River. In Britain and Germany, the most prolific consultants were chemists, because of their essential expertise in new products such as acids, soaps, paints and especially synthetic dyes, including mauve and alizarin. Consulting chemists also found themselves in prominent public roles as expert witnesses in sensational patent cases. Witness-box quarrelling among chemists made good newspaper copy, and it highlighted profound developments in the chemical industries. Changes in patent law in the United States, Britain and Germany allowed inventors to claim those new chemical products and processes as their intellectual property (IP) instead of judging them to be scientific discoveries, which were, by definition, unpatentable.

At the turn of the twentieth century, the independent consulting scientist was replaced by the salaried researcher in new industrial laboratories. These labs represented the incorporation of applied science; that is, the creation of a separate place within the organization for ‘research and development’ — a phrase that entered the lexicon at this time.

In Germany, the largest dye companies, such as Bayer, Hoechst and BASF, were the first to establish dedicated labs for chemical research. In the United States, the prototype for the industrial research lab appeared in the electrical industry, when inventor Thomas Edison set up an ‘invention factory’ in Menlo Park, New Jersey, in 1876. 

It was the First World War and the embargo on all German products, especially chemicals, that was the catalyst to the golden age of ‘industrial research’, a neologism of the 1920s. Between 1919 and 1936, US corporations established more than 1,100 labs in nearly all industries — petroleum, pharmaceuticals, cars, steel — thereby dominating the world’s industrial research. In 1921, these employed roughly 3,000 engineers and scientists; by 1940, there were more than 27,000 researchers. At the end of the Second World War, the figure was nearly 46,0005.

This remarkable proliferation reflected the massive scale of vertically integrated corporations that controlled nearly all areas of their respective industries, from natural resources through R&D to mass production and mass marketing. Industrial research was also fuelled by radical changes in US patent law that allowed these behemoths to claim the IP of their employees. The inventor was now the corporation.

In short, national standing and international acclaim seemed to confirm that science done under the auspices of industry was equal to science in universities or governments. Still, industrial labs of the 1920s and 1930s were not simply universities without students. As institutions of applied science, they always needed to show corporate headquarters their value in terms of profitable products and processes.




