R. L. Stevenson, A Child's Garden of Verses

As we have seen, unless one is as clever as Nature is, the whole business of making tension structures is set about with difficulties, complications and treacherous traps for the unwary. This is especially the case when we want to make a structure from more than one piece of material, so that we are faced with the problem of preventing it from coming apart at the joints. For these reasons our ancestors generally avoided tension structures as far as they could and tried to use constructions in which everything was in compression.

Much the oldest and the most satisfactory way of doing this is to use masonry. As a matter of fact the immense success of masonry buildings has really been due to two factors. The first is the obvious one about avoiding tension stresses, especially in the joints; the second reason may be less obvious. It is that the nature of the design problem in large masonry buildings is peculiarly adapted to the limitations of the pre-scientific mind.

Out of all the different kinds of structures which might be made, the masonry building is, as we shall see, the only one in which a blind reliance on traditional proportions will not automatically lead to disaster. This is why, historically, masonry buildings were by far the largest and most imposing of the works of man. The desire to build cloud-capp'd towers and solemn temples goes far back into history and indeed into prehistory. There is a quotation from Genesis about the Tower of Babel at the head of Chapter 1. It may be remembered that this was a project to build ‘a tower with its top in the heavens'. However, I do not think any theologian has ever inquired to what height such a tower could really have been built.

Nearly all the load upon the walls would have been due to the effect of their own weight, and one way of looking at the problem is to calculate the direct compressive stress which would be caused near the bottom of the tower by the vertical dead weight of the masonry. A limit will be set to the height of the structure when the bricks begin to be crushed by the superincumbent weight.

Now brick* and stone weigh about 120 lb. per cubic foot (2,000 kg/m3), and the crushing strength of these materials is generally rather better than 6,000 p.s.i. or 40 MN/m2. Elementary arithmetic shows that a tower with parallel walls could have been built to a height of 7,000 feet or 2 kilometres before the bricks at the bottom would be crushed. However, by making the walls taper towards the top, it could have been made much higher still; this is more or less how mountains work. Mount Everest is 29,028 feet or about 8 kilometres high and shows no signs of collapsing. Thus a simple tower, preferably with a broad base and tapered towards the top, could well have been built to such a height that the men of Shinar would have run short of oxygen and had difficulty in breathing before the brick walls were crushed beneath their own dead weight.

Although there is nothing very much wrong with this sum, in fact even the most ambitious towers have never been built to anything remotely approaching that kind of height. The tallest ‘building' which actually exists today is probably the New York Trade Center, which is only about 1,350 feet or 400 metres high; and this, like other skyscrapers, could be said to be cheating, since its structure is made of steel. The Great Pyramid and the highest cathedral spires reach a little more than 500 feet or 150 metres, but very few other masonry buildings are more than half so tall; the great majority are much lower still.

Therefore the compressive stresses in everyday masonry due to its own vertical dead weight are very small indeed. In general they are seldom more than a hundredth part of the crushing strength of the stone, and so this factor is not, in practice, a limitation upon the height or the strength of buildings. However – to be biblical again – the Tower of Siloam, which was probably not particularly high, fell and killed eighteen people, and it is notorious that in spite of the confidence of builders and architects, walls and buildings do fall down unexpectedly. They have been doing so for a very long time and they still sometimes do so today. Since masonry is heavy, people often get killed.

If walls do not collapse because of the direct crushing stress upon the material, why do they fall down? Once again, we can learn from what children do. When we were very young, most of us played with ‘bricks', and about the first thing we did was to build a tower by piling one brick upon another rather erratically. Usually, when the tower had reached a modest height, it fell down. Even the child knew perfectly well, although he could not have expressed the idea in scientific words, that there was no question of the bricks being crushed under a compressive stress. The actual stress in the bricks was negligible; what happened was that the pile of bricks tipped up and fell over because the tower was not straight and vertical. In other words the failure was due to lack of stability and not to lack of strength. Although this distinction soon becomes evident to young children, it is not always clear to builders and architects. For the same reason the reflections of art historians who write about cathedrals and other buildings are apt to make rather distressing reading.

Thrust lines and the stability of walls

How reverend is the face of this tall pile,

Whose ancient pillars rear their marble heads,

To bear aloft its arched and ponderous roof,

By its own weight made steadfast and immoveable,

Looking tranquillity. It strikes an awe

And terror on my aching sight.

William Congreve, The Mourning Bride

There was only one culture in Queen Anne's time, and there is very little doubt that Congreve (1670-1729) talked and drank with Vanbrugh, who wrote plays and designed Blenheim Palace, and also with Sir Christopher Wren himself. To all these people it was perfectly clear – in a general kind of way – that what kept a building from tipping up and collapsing was not so much the strength of the stones and mortar as the weight of the material, acting in the right places.

However, it is one thing to be aware of this in a general kind of way and another to understand what is happening in detail and to be able to predict just when a building is safe and when it is not. In order to get a proper scientific understanding of the behaviour of masonry it is necessary to treat it as an elastic material; that is to say, one must take into account the fact that the stones deflect when they are loaded and that they obey Hooke's law. It is also a considerable help, though perhaps not absolutely essential, to make use of the concepts of stress and strain.

At first sight it does, of course, seem improbable that solid brick and stone should deflect to any significant extent under the loads which occur in a building. In fact for at least a century after Hooke's time the common-sense view prevailed, and builders and architects and engineers persisted in ignoring Hooke's law and treating masonry as if it were perfectly rigid. In consequence, their buildings sometimes fell down because they got their sums wrong.

As a matter of fact the Young's moduli of brick and stone are not particularly high, and, as one can see from the bent pillars in Salisbury Cathedral (Plate 1), the elastic movements in masonry are by no means so tiny as one might suppose. Even in an ordinary small house the walls are likely to be shortened or compressed elastically, in the vertical direction, by something like a millimetre under their own weight. In a large building the movements are naturally much greater. Incidentally, when the house is shaken by the wind during a gale, you are not imagining the effect; the house is being shaken by the wind. The top of the Empire State building sways something like two feet during a storm.*

The modern analysis of masonry structures is based upon simple Hookean elasticity and also upon four assumptions, all of which turn out to be justified by practical experience. These are:

That the compressive stresses are so small that the material will not be broken by crushing. We have already discussed why this is so.

That, owing to the use of mortar or cement, the fit between the joints is so good that the compressive forces will be transmitted over the whole area of the joint and not just at a few high spots.

That the friction in the joints is so high that failure will not happen because of bricks or stones sliding over each other. In fact no sliding movements at all will take place before the structure collapses.

That the joints have no useful tensile strength. Even if, by chance, the mortar does have some strength in tension, this cannot be relied upon and must be neglected.

Thus the function of the mortar is not to ‘glue' the bricks or stones together but simply to transmit the compressive load more evenly.

As far as I know, the first person to take the elastic deformations of masonry into account was Thomas Young. Young considered what would happen in a rectangular block of masonry, such as a piece of a wall, when it had to carry a vertical compressive load, P, let us say. In what follows I have simplified Young's arguments by translating them into the language of stress and strain, which of course was not available in his time.

As long as P acts symmetrically along the centre-line, that is, down the middle of the wall, then the masonry will be compressed uniformly, and, because of Mr Hooke, the corresponding distribution of compressive stress across the thickness of the wall will also be uniform (Figure 1).

Suppose, now, that the vertical load, P, becomes a little eccentric, that is to say, it no longer acts exactly along the centreline; then the compressive stress can no longer be spread evenly but must be higher on one side than on the other so as to react properly against the load and keep it in balance. If the material obeys Hooke's law, then Young showed that the stress will be distributed linearly and the stress-distribution diagram will look like Figure 2.

So far the mortar in the joint is quite happy because the whole width of the joint is still safely in compression. However, if the position of the load is displaced still further from the centre – in fact to the edge of what is called the ‘middle third' of the wall -then a situation like Figure 3 will arise where the load distribution is now triangular and the compressive stress at the outside edge of the joint is zero.

Figure 1. Load P acting in centre

Figure 2. Load P slightly eccentric of joint A B. but within the ‘middle third'of A B.

This, in itself, does not matter too much, but it must be becoming clear to the percipient mind that something is about to happen. In fact, if the load is now displaced a little further outwards, something will happen: that is to say, a situation like Figure 4.

The stress at the opposite surface of the wall has now changed from compression to tension. We said, however, that mortar cannot be trusted to take tension, and this is generally only too true. What one would expect to happen usually does happen: the joint cracks. Of course it is a bad thing for walls to crack, and it should not be allowed to happen in well-regulated buildings, but it does not necessarily follow that the wall is going to fall down immediately. What is likely to occur in real life is simply that the crack will gape a bit but the wall will continue to stand up, resting on the parts which are still in contact (Figure 5).

Figure 3. Load P acting at the edge of the ‘middle third'of AB.

Figure 4. Load P acting outside the ‘middle third'of A B.

All this savours somewhat of living dangerously, and one of these days the line of the thrust may stray outside the surface of the wall, when, as a little thought will show, since no tension forces are available, one or more of the joints will hinge about its outside edge and the wall will tip up and fall down (Figure 6). It really will.

Figure 5. What really happens as a result of the condition drawn in Figure 4. The joint cracks from B to C, and the load is now carried over the area AC- effectively a narrower wall.

At the time when he came to these conclusions, that is, about 1802, Young, a rising man of twenty-nine, was appointed to the chair of Natural Philosophy at the Royal Institution in London. His colleague, and in some sense his rival, was Humphry Davy, who was made Professor of Chemistry in the same year at the improbable age of twenty-four. It was the custom of the professors of the Royal Institution, then as now, to deliver series of lectures to popular audiences. In those days, however, these lectures had very much of a television character, and the Institution relied heavily upon them for both money and publicity.

Figure 6. When load P acts beyond A, i.e. outside the surface boundary of the wall, the wall will hinge about A, tip up and fall.

Young took his educational mission seriously, and, filled with the enthusiasm of discovery, he launched into a series of lectures about the elasticity of various kinds of structures, with many useful and novel observations on the behaviour of walls and arches.

The audience at Albemarle Street in those days was a fashionable one and is said to have consisted largely of ‘silly women and dilettante philosophers'. Young by no means neglected the feminine part of his audience, and he remarked in his opening lecture:

A considerable part of my audience, to whose information it will be my particular ambition to accommodate my lectures, consists of that sex which, by the custom of civilized society, is in some measure exempted from the more laborious duties which occupy the time and attention of the other sex. The many leisure hours which are at the command of females in the superior orders of society may surely be appropriated, with greater satisfaction, to the improvement of the mind and to the acquisition of knowledge than to such amusements as are only designed for facilitating the insipid consumption of superfluous time...

However, fortune does not always attend those who, however earnestly, strive to communicate useful information, and one may suspect that some of the females of the superior orders of society slipped away, preferring insipidly to consume their superfluous time. In any case Davy, who exhibited in his own lectures some of the exciting phenomena associated with the new electric fluid, together with a range of colourful chemical experiments, was a pushing young particle with what we should now call a television personality. Davy was also remarkably good-looking, and young women flocked to his lectures for reasons which were not always strictly academic; ‘those eyes', one of them was heard to say, ‘were made for something besides poring over crucibles.' The result, in box-office terms, could not be in doubt, and we are told that

Dr Young, whose profound knowledge of the subjects he taught no one will venture to question, lectured in the same theatre and to an audience similarly constituted to that which was attracted to Davy, but he found the number of his attendants diminish daily and for no other reason than that he adopted too severe and too didactic a style.

This kind of failure might not have mattered too much if Young could have attracted the interest and support of practical engineers. However, the engineering profession at that time was led, and frequently dominated, by the great Thomas Telford (1757-1834), whose views, as we have seen, were severely pragmatic and anti-theoretical. In consequence Young resigned his chair almost immediately and returned to his medical practice.* The development of elasticity passed, for many years, to France, where, at this time, Napoleon was actively encouraging the study of structural theory.

The theory about elastic compression, the ‘middle third' and instability which so bored the fashionable females at Young's lectures does really tell us practically all we need to know about the behaviour of joints in masonry, provided that we also know the position at which the weight can be considered as acting. In other words, how eccentric is the load?

This is best determined by means of what is called the ‘thrust line', that is to say, a line passing down the wall of a building from the top to the bottom which defines the position at which the vertical thrust can be considered as acting in each successive joint. The thrust line is a French invention and seems to have been first thought of by Coulomb (1736-1806).

Figure 7. For the simplest symmetrical case, the ‘thrust line' passes down th e centre of a wall.

For a very simple symmetrical wall or column or pillar, such as Figure 7, the thrust line will clearly pass down the middle of the wall and so there is really no problem. However, in a building with any pretension to sophistication there is most likely to be at least one oblique force arising from the sideways thrust of the roof members, from archways or vaultings or from various other forms of asymmetrical construction. In such a case the thrust line will no longer pass neatly down the middle of the wall but will be displaced to one side, frequently into a curved path such as Figure 8.*

If, on plotting the thrust line, we find that it is in danger of reaching the surface of the wall at any point, then we shall clearly have to think again, and think hard, because there is a good chance that a building designed like that will fall down.

Figure 8. The effect of oblique loading is to deflect the thrust line in this kind of way.

One of the things we can do, and it may well be one of the most effective, is to add weight to the top of the wall. What then happens can be represented diagrammatically by Figure 9. Contrary to what one might suppose, weight at the top is likely to make a wall more, and not less, stable and will bring an erring thrust line back, more or less, to where it ought to be.

One way to do this is simply to build the wall to a greater height than appears to be really necessary, and, in addition, anything like heavy balustrades and copings are a good thing. If it is that sort of building and you can afford it, a line of statues will always help (Figure 10). This is the structural justification for the pinnacles and statuary on Gothic churches and cathedrals. They are really up there to say ‘boo' to the functionalists and to all the dreary people who bleat too much about ‘efficiency'.

Figure 9. The effect of an additional load at the top of the wall is to reduce the eccentricity of the thrust line.

Figure 10. This can be done by adding top weight in the form of pinnacle, statues etc.

It used to be supposed that it was absolutely essential that the thrust line* should be kept within the ‘middle third' of a wall because, if cracks appeared, the wall might fall down. This is a sound conservative principle which makes for safety and ought to be observed, but, in this permissive age, I am afraid that it seldom is. Anyone who looks at a modern housing estate or a new university cannot help seeing that the walls are full of cracks, and, where there is a crack, there must once have been a tension stress. However, although these cracks do a good deal of damage to the plaster-work and interior decoration,† they seldom constitute any danger to the stability of the main structure.

The basic condition for the safety of masonry is that the thrust line should always be kept well inside the surface of a wall or column.

Dams

Like walls, masonry dams usually fail not from lack of strength but from lack of stability; again they are liable to tip up. The sideways thrust on a dam due to the pressure of the impounded water is generally comparable to the weight of the masonry used in its construction. For this reason there are apt to be very large variations in the position of the active thrust line between the ‘full' and the ‘empty' conditions. With dams, unlike ordinary buildings, one cannot take any liberties at all with the ‘middle third' rule. It is quite essential that there should be no cracks of any kind in the masonry, especially on the upstream side. If there are cracks, water under pressure is likely to get inside the structure of the dam and to have two effects, both bad.

The first effect is that the flow of water will damage the masonry; to counteract any seepage, arrangements are generally made to drain the interior of large dams. The second effect is more dramatic. It is that the water pressure within the crack will exert a vertical lifting force (about 5 tons per square foot at a depth of 100 feet, i.e. 0-5 MN/m2 at a depth of 30 metres) which, acting upon an already rather critical situation, will overturn the dam.

It is probable that the destruction of the Mohne and Eder dams by the R.A.F. in 1943 was accomplished in two stages, separated by a short space of time. In the first stage Barnes Wallis's bombs were dropped against the upstream faces of the dams, where they sank before exploding. When they did explode, the structure of the dams would have been cracked deep down, and after a short delay the actual overturning of the dams themselves was caused by the penetration of high-pressure water into the cracks. Those who have read accounts of the operation will remember that there was an appreciable pause between the explosion of the bombs and the visible failure of the dams. The breaching of these dams, of course, did an immense amount of damage in the Ruhr.

The failure of a dam in peace-time is an engineer's nightmare. Even if the dam is made, not from stone, but from unreinforced concrete, it will be unwise to count upon any reliable tensile strength. Thus in all unreinforced dams the thrust line must not move upstream beyond the ‘middle third' when the dam is empty nor downstream of it when it is full, and it is just as well to leave something in hand. These requirements usually result in the tapering, asymmetrical shape with which most of us are familiar (Figure 11).

However, dams are expensive in relation to the value of the water which they impound, and engineers are continually looking for cheaper ways of making them. A considerable saving in the weight and cost of cement can generally be achieved by reinforcing the concrete with steel rods, especially if the reinforcement is under tension. However, unless the reinforcing rods are anchored to solid rock beneath the foundations of the dam, there is a real danger that the whole dam, reinforcements and all, will be uprooted and overturned.

Figure 11. Unreinforced masonry dam.

One way of dealing with the situation is shown in Figure 12. Here simple vertical steel tie-rods are anchored to the rock beneath and carried up through the concrete to the top of the dam, where they are tensioned by means of a jacking arrangement. It will be seen that these rods are really doing the same job as the angels and pinnacles in a cathedral. Of course, all traditional heavy masonry may be regarded as a structure which is ‘pre-stressed' by its own weight. No doubt a line of heavy statues along the top of a dam would be effective and might look rather nice, but I am afraid they would turn out to be more expensive than the steel rods.

Figure 12. Reinforced dam. A thinner, cheaper dam can sometimes be achieved by using pre-tensioned steel rods anchored in the rock beneath. This is equivalent to extra weight on top of the dam and so restricts the movement of the thrust line.

Arches

Although the arch is not quite as old as masonry itself, it is certainly very old. There is evidence of fully developed brick arches, both in Egypt and in Mesopotamia, going back to about 3,600 B.C. The stone arch seems to have evolved separately, and possibly independently, from the idea of ‘corbelling', that is to say, building out the masonry step-wise from each side until the stones met in the middle. The vaulted chambers (Plate 5) deep under the walls of the Mycenaean city of Tiryns – which were old when Homer marvelled at them – are roofed in this way. The postern gate in these immense walls (Plate 6) might be regarded as a development of corbelling. It was probably built before 1,800 B.C.

However, the corbelled* or the semi-corbelled arch, like the gate at Tiryns, is rather a crude affair. Arches soon developed a construction in which the bricks or stones of the arch-ring are made slightly wedge-shaped and are called ‘voussoirs'. The various parts of a traditional arch are shown in Figure 13.

Figure 13. Various parts of an arch.

The voussoir at the top or crown of the arch is called the ‘keystone' and is sometimes made larger than the rest. Although poets, politicians and other non-technical people have attributed special qualities to real and figurative keystones, in fact the keystone is functionally no different from all the other voussoirs, and its distinction, if it has any, is purely decorative.

The structural function of an arch is to support the downward loads which come upon it by turning them into a lateral thrust which runs round the ring of the arch and pushes the voussoirs against each other. The voussoirs, naturally, push in their turn against the abutments or springings of the arch. The manner in which this process works is pretty clear from common sense (Figure 14).

Figure 14. An arch collects the vertical loads and turns them into lateral ones. These lateral loads run round the arch ring and are reacted by the abutments.

The arch ring, with its voussoirs, is very much like a curved wall, and the position of the compressive loads at each joint can be indicated by a thrust line in the same sort of way. In this case the thrust line has to curve round and follow, more or less, the shape of the arch. We shall talk about thrust lines in arches in the next chapter; for the moment let us accept that there is a thrust line. Also, as with the wall, we can assume that the voussoirs cannot slide over each other and that the joints cannot take tension.

The joints between the voussoirs will behave in much the same way as the joints between the stones in a wall. If the thrust line strays beyond the ‘middle third' then a crack will appear; also, if the thrust line moves to the edge of a joint, that is to say, to the boundary of the arch ring, then a ‘hinge' will develop. What makes the arch dramatically different from a mere plebeian wall, however, is that, whereas the wall now falls down, the arch does not. From Figure 15 it can be seen that no fewer than three hinge-points can develop in an arch without anything very dramatic happening. In fact a good many modern arch bridges are deliberately built with three hinged joints so as to allow for thermal expansion.

Figure 15. An arch can put up with three hinge-points without collapsing; in fact many modern arches are deliberately built in this way.

If we really want the bridge to fall down then we shall need four hinge-points so that the arch can become in effect a three-linked chain or ‘mechanism' which is now at liberty to fold itself up and collapse (Figure 16). Incidentally, this is why, if you want to demolish a bridge – for good or bad reasons – it is best to put the explosive charge somewhere near the ‘thirds point' of the arch. This generally involves digging down through the roadway so as to reach the top of the arch ring. Since this takes time, the demolition of bridges behind a retreating army is often ineffectual.

All this means that arches are extraordinarily stable and are not unduly sensitive to the movements of their foundations. If there is any appreciable movement in the foundation a wall will probably collapse*; arches do not much mind, and some sort of distortion is quite common. Clare bridge, for instance, in the Backs of Cambridge (Plate 7) is very noticeably bent in the middle because of the movement of the abutments. It has been like that for a long time and is quite safe. In the same way arches stand up remarkably well to earthquakes and to other kinds of abuse, such as modern traffic.

Figure 16. An arch needs to develop four hinge-points before it can collapse.

Altogether it is not surprising that many of our ancestors were so addicted to arches, for they will probably go on standing up even if you have got all your sums wrong (or not done any sums at all) and, in addition, placed the foundations of the whole thing iij a bog – as indeed is the case with several of the English cathedrals.

It is noticeable that, in ruins, it is generally the arches which have survived best. This is partly due to the inherent stability of arches, though it may well have more to do with the fact that the wedge-shaped stones of the voussoirs are less attractive to the local peasantry than the rectangular ones in the walls. The preservation of the round columns of many Greek temples, long after the ashlar of the walls has been stolen, is no doubt due to similar causes.

It is generally easier to keep the thrust line well inside a wall or an arch if the masonry is thick; but of course solid brick and stone-work are expensive. To get extra thickness at a low price the Romans introduced mass concrete. This was usually made by mixing pozzolana (pulvis puteolanis) – a natural earth which is fairly common in Italy – with lime and adding sand and gravel.

If walls and arches are made thicker they are generally more stable and may not need to be made so heavy. If less weight of material has to be transported and handled, then the cost of construction is likely to come down. Vitruvius (fl. 20 B.C.), who was a very distinguished architectural writer as well as an artillery officer, tells us that in his day low-density concretes were often made by incorporating pumice powder. The great dome of the HagiaSophiain Constantinople (a.d. 528) is made in the same way.

Reduction of weight and cost can be taken still further by incorporating empty containers of one sort or another in the concrete. In the ancient world the very extensive and prosperous wine trade was carried on by means of amphorae. These large earthenware containers were strictly non-returnable and they tended to accumulate in embarrassing quantities. The obvious solution was to cast them into concrete, and in fact many late Roman buildings are made in this way. In particular, the beautiful early Byzantine churches at Ravenna are said to be composed largely of disposable empties.*

Scale·, proportion and safety

Although some structures are alleged to be sustained by the Power of Faith and others to be held together entirely by paint or rust, unless a designer is totally irresponsible, he likes to have some kind of objective assurance about the strength and stability of whatever he is proposing to make. If one is unable to do the right sort of modern calculations then the obvious thing to do is either to make a model or else to scale up from some previous smaller version of the structure which has proved to be successful.

This, of course, is pretty well what people used to do down to quite recent times. Perhaps they still do. The difficulty is that models are all very well if one just wants to see what the thing will look like, but they can be dangerously misleading if they are used to predict strength. This is because, as we scale up, the weight of the structure will increase as the cube of the dimensions; that is, if we double the size, the weight will increase eightfold. The cross-sectional areas of the various parts which have to carry this load will, however, increase only as the square of the dimensions, so that, in a structure of twice the size, such parts will have only four times the area. Thus the stress will go up linearly with the dimensions, and, if we double the size, we double the stress and we shall soon be in serious trouble.

The strength of any structure which is liable to fail because the material breaks cannot be predicted from models or by scaling up from previous experience.

This principle, which was discovered by Galileo, is known as the ‘square-cube law' and it is one good reason why vehicles and ships and aircraft and machinery need to be designed by proper modern analytical methods. This is probably why such things were so late in developing, at least in their modern forms. However, we can neglect the square-cube law with most masonry buildings because, as we have said, buildings do not normally fail by reason of the material breaking in compression. The stresses in masonry are so low that we can afford to go on scaling them up almost indefinitely. Unlike most other structures, buildings fail because they become unstable and tip up; and for any size of building this can be predicted from a model.

Plate 1

Chapter 2

Each of the four columns which support the 400 foot (120 metre) tower of Salisbury Cathedral is very noticeably bent. Masonry is much more elastic than is generally supposed.

Plate 2

Chapter 4

Stress concentration at a crack tip. The shear stress in a transparent material is revealed by polarized light. The bands in this photograph are, in effect, contours of equal shear stress.

Plate 3

Chapter 8

Rubber has a ‘sigmoid' stress-strain curve like Figure 4, Chapter 8. A tube made from such a material will not distend evenly under pressure but will bulge into an ‘aneurism'. This is why artery walls do not have rubbery elasticity.

Plate 4

Chapter 8

Artery walls and other living soft tissues have a special kind of elasticity like that in Figure 5, Chapter 8. The artery wall is constructed partly of elastin reinforced by kinked collagen fibres. This helps to produce the required ‘safe' type of elasticity. (The artery tends to flatten when it is emptied of blood after death.)

Plate 5

Chapter 9

Corbelled vault at Tiryns (c. 1,800 B.C.). Corbelled arches and vaults preceded the true arch.

Plate 6

Chapter 9

Semi-corbelled postern gate at Tiryns. These walls were old when Homer marvelled at them.

Plate 7

Chapter 9

It is very difficult to get a true arch to fall down. The foundations of Clare bridge, Cambridge, moved a long time ago, but the bridge is perfectly safe though the arch has distorted.

Plate 8

Chapter 9

Part of the enormous temple of the Olympian Zeus at Athens. It was built in the Corinthian style by the Emperor Hadrian about a.d. 138. One of the architraves can be seen to be cracked. Note the walls of the Acropolis, which tower above Hadrian's temple.

Plate 9

Chapter 9

Skeletons of (a) gibbon and (b) gorilla (to scale). The ‘square-cube' law applies more to beams than to columns. Thus as animals get larger, their ribs and limb bones tend to become thicker in proportion to their vertebrae.

Plate 10

Chapter 10

Brunei's Maidenhead bridge (1837) has the longest and flattest brick arches in the world. Many people predicted that the arches would not stand, but they are still there today carrying trains ten times heavier than Brunei's.

Plate 11

Chapter 10

Telford's Menai suspension bridge (1819). The span of 550 feet (166 metres) is approaching the limit for wrought-iron suspension chains.

Plate 12

Chapter 10

The Severn suspension bridge. High tensile steel cables with. ten times tne tensile strength of wrought iron enable bridges nearly ten times as long as Telford's Menai bridge to be constructed.

Plate 13

Chapter 11

Where there are no side aisles, as in King's College Chapel, Cambridge, the buttresses can be carried straight up without further complication.

Plate 14

Chapter 11

H.M.S. Victory. Her masts form a superb example of a trussed cantilever structure of very large dimensions.

Plate 15

Chapter 11

The American railways could be built quickly and cheaply because wooden trestle bridges were used very extensively to save the cost of earthworks (c. 1875).

Plate 16

Chapters 11 and 13

Stephenson's Britannia railway bridge (1850) used wrought-iron box beams. The trains ran inside the beams. Much trouble was experienced in preventing the thin iron plating from buckling. In front of the bridge are grouped a number of contemporary engineers; Robert Stephenson is seated in the left centre and I. K. Brunei is seated on the extreme right.

Plate 17

Chapter 12

The bias cut, invented by Mile Vionnet, exploits the low shear modulus and high Poisson's ratio of certain square-weave fabrics in the 45° direction. This is one of the earliest Vionnet bias-cut dresses (a.d. 1926).

Plate 18

Chapter 12

Contemporary square-cut dress (also Vionnet). Note low Poisson's ratio and lack of clinging effect. The vertical creases are caused by the existence of a Wagner tension field.

Plate 19

Chapter 12

Wagner tension field in the fuselage skin of a Fairey Rotadyne.

Plate 20

Chapter 15

The Tacoma Narrows bridge is a classic example of a suspension bridge built with inadequate torsional stiffness. Known as ‘Galloping Gertie' it displayed serious oscillation when exposed to quite moderate winds, and very soon wriggled and buckled itself into failure in a wind of only 42m.p.h.

Plate 21

Chapter 16

The first real mass-production machinery to come into use was the block-making equipment at Portsmouth Dockyard. Both the machinery and the blocks themselves may be regarded as handsome, perhaps as beautiful.

Plate 22

Chapter 16

The classical form of steam yacht developed by George Lennox Watson is one of the most beautiful of all ship conventions. But it is largely non-functional. The ends and especially the bowsprit represent sailing-ship practice. That is to say they are「skiamorphs.」(S.Y. Nahlin. )

Plate 23

Chapters 9 and 16

No single photograph can do justice to the Parthenon, but this picture of part of the south-west corner may give some slight impression. (Note that the left-hand lintel is cracked; for this reason the architraves are in triplicate. Note also numerous skiamorphs or vestiges of wooden construction, e.g., triglyphs, mutuies, etc.)

Plate 24

Chapter 16

Unlike the classical Greeks one thousand years later, the Mycenaean Greeks (c. 1,500 B.C.) designed their buildings to take account of the low tensile strength of stone. The lintel of the Lion Gate at Mycenae is provided with a triangular block of stone to relieve the tensile loads. The architrave is a single block and carries very little stress. The distance between the centres of the chariot ruts corresponds accurately to the「standard」gauge of modern railways.

Looking at the problem philosophically, the stability of a building is not different from the stability of a balance or a weighing machine such as a steelyard (Figure 17). The upsetting moments on both sides will be as the fourth power of the dimensions; if we scale up, everything remains in balance. Thus, if a small building stands, a scaled-up version of it can also be relied upon to do so, and the ‘mystery' of the medieval builders consisted in reducing this experience to a series of rules and proportions. However, that they also used models – sometimes 60 feet (18 metres) long – made from masonry or plaster is well established. This mode of procedure generally worked even for structures of incredible complexity, such as Rheims Cathedral (Figure 18).

Figure 17. The stability of a building is like that of a balance; it is not affected by scaling up.

The Greeks of the classical period abandoned the arch for most of their serious architecture, preferring to use stone beams or lintels. In such beams the tensile stresses were relatively high and often too near the limit for safety. A considerable number of these architraves were cracked, even in ancient times. This is why iron reinforcement was used in the marble beams of the Propylaea, for instance. What saved the Doric temple from structural collapse was that the stone beams were short and deep and, as they cracked, they turned themselves into arches (Figure 19, Plates 8 and 23).

Figure 18. Rheims Cathedral: flying buttresses (after Viollet-le-Duc).

Greek trabeate* architecture required very large blocks of stone. When civilization decayed, the transportation of large masses became increasingly difficult, and this may have been one, strictly practical, reason why the medieval builders favoured Gothic arches and vaults, which can be made from quite small stones.

Figure 19. If a short stone lintel or architrave cracks on the tension face, it may turn itself into a three-hinge arch and continue to support the load.

As Sir John Soane pointed out nearly 200 years ago in his lectures on architecture, in spite of the limitations of stone beams, the size of ancient buildings was often greater than that of corresponding modern ones. The Parthenon, for instance, is considerably bigger than St Martin-in-the-Fields. Nevertheless, the Parthenon – about 230 by 100 feet (69 by 30 metres) – is small compared with Hadrian's temple of the Olympian Zeus close by, which measures 359 by 173 feet (108 by 52 metres) and would fill most of Trafalgar Square (Plate 8). Yet Hadrian's temple, in its turn, is dwarfed by the walls of the Acropolis, which tower high above it. Again, for sheer size, many of the Roman bridges and aqueducts are impressive by any standards.

These ancient constructions have more often been destroyed by men than by Nature and some of them are still in good condition today. However, in all these works the ancients were more or less following familiar examples; when they were unable to do so they were apt to come badly unstuck. Not only are ancient ships and vehicles almost pathetically small and fragile to our modern eyes, but new and unconventional buildings such as the Roman Insulae – which were tall blocks of flats – fell down with such depressing frequency that the Emperor Augustus was compelled to pass laws restricting their height to 60 feet (18 metres).

On backbones and skeletons

The backbones of people and animals consist of a series of short, drum-like vertebrae, made from hard bone. They are separated from each other by the ‘intervertebral discs', which are made from comparatively soft material and thus allow a limited amount of movement between the vertebrae. As a rule, the spine is subject to an overall compression arising both from the weights it has to carry and also from the pull of the various muscles and tendons.

In young people the material of the discs is flexible and tough, and it can withstand considerable tensile stresses if it has to. So much so that, if the spine is damaged by tensile forces, fracture is likely to occur in the bone rather than in the discs. After the age of about twenty, however, the disc material gets progressively less flexible and also considerably weaker in tension. As we get more venerable, therefore, we approach a situation in which our backbone is getting rather like a column in a church or a temple. The vertebrae represent the stone drums and the discs the weak mortar. Although the discs can still, at a pinch, take a certain amount of tension, this is, on the whole, a situation to be avoided.

Therefore, for middle-aged people, it is wise to keep the thrust line as near the middle of the backbone as possible. This is why there is a right and a wrong way of lifting a heavy weight. If we lift the weight in the wrong way, excessive tensile forces are set up in the joints and one of these may break. The result is likely to be a ‘slipped disc' or one of the other manifold and rather mysterious back troubles which we include under the name of ‘lumbago' – which is apt to be surprisingly painful.

In so far as a backbone behaves like a wall or a masonry column and departure from the ‘middle third rule' represents some sort of limiting condition, then the same kind of rules apply to scaling up an animal as we have seen apply to scaling up a building. Thus if we start with a small animal and progressively increase its size, the necessary thickness of the vertebrae will remain in due proportion. Most of the other bones, however, such as the ribs and the bones of the limbs, are subjected chiefly to bending – rather like the lintels of a temple – and the loads upon them are likely to be proportionate to the mass of the animal. It follows, therefore, that such bones have to be made disproportionately thicker.

If we look in a museum at the skeletons of a series of similar animals of increasing size, such as monkeys, it does appear that, whereas the dimensions of the vertebrae of little monkeys and middle-sized monkeys and gorillas and men are roughly in proportion to the height of the animal, the.limb bones and, especially, the ribs become very much thicker and heavier, for the size of the animal, as the scale increases (Plate 9).

In this respect Nature seems to be cleverer than the Roman architects, who, as they increased the size of their temples, abandoned the rather stocky Doric proportions and built, as a rule, in the florid Imperial Corinthian style, with slender architraves which frequently broke.

* * *

* Note that Genesis 11 specifically says *let us make bricks and bake them hard*. There was no question of using cheap mud bricks as the Egyptians did. This seems to be an early example of the Concorde syndrome.

* Of the abbey church of Saint Denis, in France, during the twelfth century, we read ‘. .. such a force of contrary gales hurled itself against the aforesaid arches, not supported by scaffolding nor resting on any props, that they threatened baneful ruin at any moment, miserably trembling and, as it were, swaying hither and thither.' (I am indebted to Prof. Hey man for this reference.)

* Davy remained at the Royal Institution and prospered. He became Sir Humphry and President of the Royal Society. He is said to have been offered a bishopric if he would take Holy Orders. As a great man who had risen from humble beginnings he behaved rather badly to a coalminer called George Stephenson but rather well to a blacksmith's son called Michael Faraday.

* That this is so can be checked by applying the parallelogram of forces (whose acquaintance can be renewed in the pages of elementary text-books on mechanics) at each level in the wall. The parallelogram of forces is supposed to have been invented by Simon Stevin in 1586. The absence of the concept of the resolution of forces is one reason why it is impossible that either ancient or medieval architects could have designed their buildings in the modern way.

* There are really several thrust lines, and all of them need to be kept inside the surface of the wall.

The passive thrust line. This is the thrust line which results from the weight of the wall itself and of all the things which are permanently attached to it, such as floors and roofs.

The active thrust lines. These are the thrust lines which result, not only from the permanent parts of the building, but also from all the transient loads which might be applied to it by wind pressure or the weight of things like water, coal, snow, machinery, vehicles, people and so on. The shapes of the various active thrust lines define the ways in which a masonry structure can safely be loaded.

† This is one of the reasons for the modern fashion of not plastering the insides of buildings.

* The true arch seems to be an old-world development. The indigenous civilizations of Mexico and Peru built their large buildings using only the corbelled arch.

* This is the rationale of mining or sapping under fortress walls during siege warfare. When the end of the tunnel was beneath the foundations of the wall its roof was supported by wooden props. At an appropriate moment a fire was lit so as to burn through the props, when it was hoped that the wall would collapse. The function of both wet and dry moats was chiefly to prevent sapping.

* The famous Bristol Channel pilot cutters (c. 1900) were ballasted with concrete which was run into the bilges. The concrete amidships, which needed to be heavy, was made up with scrap-iron and boiler-punchings. The concrete in the ends of the ship, which had to be light, was filled with empty beer bottles. For the plinths of statues and urns in my garden I generally use a mixture of old chicken-wire, empty wine bottles and concrete; it seems to work very well.

* From the Latin trabs, a beam.

Chapter 10 Something about bridges

-or Saint Benezet and Saint Isambard

London Bridge is falling down,

Falling down, falling down;

London Bridge is falling down;

My fair lady.

Build it up with brick and stone,

Brick and stone, brick and stone;

Build it up with brick and stone;

My fair lady.

Set a man to watch all night,

Watch all night, watch all night;

Set a man to watch all night;

