John Selden (1584–1654)

As we have seen, very much the commonest day-to-day practical use of structural theory is in analysing the behaviour of some specific structure: either one which it is proposed to build, one which is actually in existence but whose safety is in question, or else one which has, rather embarrassingly, already collapsed. In other words, if we know the dimensions of a given structure and the properties of the materials from which it is made, we can at least try to predict how strong it ought to be and how much it will deflect. However, although calculations of this sort are clearly very useful in particular instances, this kind of approach is only of limited help to us when we want to understand why things are the shape they are or when we want to choose which, out of several different classes of structure, would be best for a particular service. For instance, in making an aeroplane or a bridge, would it be better to use a continuous shell structure made from plates or panels or else a criss-cross lattice arrangement built up from rods or tubes and braced, perhaps, with wires? Again, why do we have so many muscles and tendons and comparatively few bones? Furthermore, how is the engineer ever to select from the large variety of materials which are usually available? Should he make his structure from steel or aluminium, from plastic or from wood?

The ‘design' of plants and animals and of the traditional artefacts did not just happen. As a rule both the shape and the materials of any structure which has evolved over a long period of time in a competitive world represent an optimization with regard to the loads which it has to carry and to the financial or the metabolic cost. We should like to achieve this sort of optimization in modern technology; but we are not always very good at it.

It is not widely realized that this subject, which is sometimes called the ‘philosophy of design', can be studied in a scientific way. This is a pity, because the results are important, both in biology and in engineering. Although not much regarded, the study of the philosophy of design has, in fact, been going on for quite a number of years. The first serious engineering approach to the subject was made by A. G. M. Michell around 1900.* Though biologists had been making remarks about the ‘square-cube law' (Chapter 9) practically since it was propounded by Galileo, it was not until 1917 that Sir D'Arcy Thompson published his beautiful book On Growth and Form (still in print), which was the first general account of the influence of structural requirements on the shapes of plants and animals. For all its many virtues, the book is not a very numerate one, and the engineering views expressed are not always sound. Though greatly, and justly, praised, Growth and Form did not have much real influence on biological thinking, either in its own time or for long afterwards. It does not seem to have influenced engineers very much either, no doubt because the time for an interaction between biological and engineering thought was not ripe.

In recent years the chief exponent of the mathematical study of the philosophy of structures has been H. L. Cox. Besides being a distinguished elastician, Mr Cox has the additional merit of being an expert on Beatrix Potter. I hope that he will forgive me for saying that he is in some ways a little like the great Thomas Young. For he shares not only something of Young's genius, but also a good deal of Young's obscurity of presentation. I am afraid lesser mortals often find Cox's expositions difficult to follow without the aid of an evangelist or interpreter. This may account for the fact that his work has received less attention than it deserves. Much of what follows is based on Cox, directly or indirectly. Let us begin with his analysis of tension structures.

The design of tension structures

It is a curiosity of engineering design that it is impossible to fashion a simple tension member without first devising some end fitting through which the load may be applied; and whether the material be wrought-iron or liana, wire rope or string, the stress system in the end fitting is a great deal more complicated than simple tension. There is plenty of scope for theory in the design of tension end fittings, but there is also a great deal of experience; and whether the competition is from the ancient pygmies' mastery of the craft of making knots in lianas, or from Brunei's development of efficient eye bars, experience will often dictate the design. Still the theorist has the final word.

H. L. Cox, The Design of Structures of Least Weight (Pergamon, 1965)

If we did not have to consider the effect of end fittings the philosophy of tension structures would be very simple indeed. For one thing, the weight of a tension structure, fitted to carry a given load, would be proportional to its length. That is to say, a rope strong enough to carry a load of one ton over a distance of one hundred metres would weigh just a hundred times as much as a rope safe to carry the same load over one metre. Furthermore, provided that the load were evenly shared, it would make no difference whether a given load were supported by one single rope or tie-bar, or by two ropes or bars each having half the cross-section.

This simple view is upset by the necessity for end fittings: that is to say, by the need to get the load in at one end of the member and out at the other. Even an ordinary rope will need a knot or a splice at each end. The knot or splice will be relatively heavy and may cost money. If we are to do an honest reckoning this weight and cost will have to be added to that of the bare tension member itself. The weight and the cost of the end fittings will be just the same, for a given load, whether the rope be long or short. Thus, other things being equal, the weight and cost of a tension member per unit length will be less for a long member than for a short one. In other words the weight is not directly proportional to the length.

Again, it can be shown, from the algebra and geometry of such a system, that the total weight of the end fittings of two tension bars, operating in parallel, is less than that of the end fittings of a single rope or bar of equivalent cross-section.* It follows that, in general, weight is saved by subdividing a tensile load between two or more tension members instead of carrying it in a single one.

As Cox points out, the stress distribution in end fittings is always complex and must include more or less severe stress concentrations, from which cracks will spread if they get the chance. Thus both the weight and the cost of the fittings will depend both upon the skill of the designer and also upon the toughness – that is to say, the work of fracture – of the material. The higher the work of fracture, the lighter and the cheaper the fitting will be. However, as we saw in Chapter 5, toughness is likely to diminish as tensile strength increases. In the case of common engineering metals, like steel, the work of fracture falls dramatically with increase of tensile strength.

Thus in choosing a material for a tension member we are commonly faced with incompatible requirements. To reduce the weight of the middle or parallel part of a tie-bar we should like to use a material of high tensile strength. For the end fittings we generally want a tough material – which is only too likely to imply the acceptance of a low tensile strength. Like many difficulties, this one must be solved by a compromise, which in this case depends chiefly on the length of the member. For very long members, such as the wire cables of a modern suspension bridge, it will generally pay to choose a high tensile steel, even if we have to accept extra weight and complication in connection with the end fittings at the anchorages of the cables. After all, there are only two of these, one at each end of the bridge, while there is perhaps a mile of wire in between. Thus the saving of weight over the middle part will more than compensate for any losses at the ends.

But when we come to things like chains with shortish links, the situation is totally different. In each short link the weight of the end fittings may well be greater than that of the middle part and must be carefully considered. This is the case with the supporting chains of the older suspension bridges. Such things were generally made from a tough and ductile wrought iron of quite low tensile strength. As we said in Chapter 10, the tensile stress in the plate links of Telford's Menai bridge chains is less than a tenth of that in the wires of a modern suspension bridge – for this excellent reason. Very similar arguments apply to shell structures such as ships and tanks and boilers and girders which are fabricated from comparatively small plates of iron or steel. It also applies to riveted aluminium structures, such as conventional aircraft. All these may be considered more or less as two-dimensional chains with rather small links. In such cases it pays to use a weaker but more ductile material; otherwise the weight of the joints would be prohibitive (see Chapter 5, Figure 13, p. 106).

The multiplication of ropes and wires in ships and biplanes and tents generally results in a saving, rather than an increase, of weight.* Naturally, all this cat's-cradle business incurs the penalty of high wind resistance, high maintenance costs and general complication. This is the price we may have to pay for low structure weight. A similar principle can be seen in animals, where Nature does not hesitate to multiply tension members such as muscles and tendons. Indeed she adopts the same device as the Elizabethan seamen to reduce the weight of end attachments. The ends of many tendons are splayed out into a fan-shaped contrivance which Sir Francis Drake would have called a ‘crowsfoot'. Each branch of the tendon has a separate little joint to the bone. Thus the weight (and perhaps the metabolic cost) is minimized.

The relative weights of tension and compression structures

As we saw in the last chapter, the breaking stresses in tension and in compression for a given solid are often different, but for many common materials, such as steel, the difference is not very great, and so the weights of short tension and compression members are likely to be fairly similar. In fact, because a compression member may not need to have heavy end fittings – whereas a tension member does – a short compression strut may well be lighter, for comparable conditions, than a tension bar.

However, as a strut gets longer, Dr Euler begins to make himself felt. It will be remembered that the buckling load of a long column varies as l/L2 (where L is the length) and this implies that, for a rod of constant cross-section, the compressive strength diminishes very rapidly with increase of length. Thus, to support any given load, a long strut has to be made very much thicker, and therefore heavier, than a short one. As we said in the last section, the same consideration does not apply to tension members.

It is revealing to study the problem of carrying one ton (1,000 kg or 10,000 Newtons) over a distance of 10 metres (33 feet) first in tension and then in compression.

IN TENSION. For a steel rod or a cable we might allow a working stress of, say, 330 MN/m2 or 50,000 p.s.i. in tension. Taking into account the end fittings, the total weight comes out at about 3-5 kg or about 8 lb.

IN COMPRESSION. To try to carry such a load in compression over such a distance by means of a solid steel rod would be silly, because if a solid rod were thick enough to avoid buckling it would need to be very heavy indeed. In practice we might well use a steel tube, which would have to be about 16 cm (6 inches) in diameter with a wall-thickness of, say, 5 mm (0-2 inch). Such a tube would weigh 200 kg or about 450 lb. In other words it would weigh between fifty and sixty times as much as the tension rod. The cost might well be in the same proportion. Furthermore, if we should want to subdivide a compression structure the situation gets not better but much worse. If we wanted to support a load of one ton, not by a single strut, but by some table-like arrangement of four struts, each 10 metres long, then the total weight of the struts would be twice as great: that is to say, 400 kg or 900 lb. The weight goes on increasing the more the structure is subdivided – in fact as √n̄ where n is the number of columns. (See Appendix 4.)

On the other hand, if we increase the load, keeping the distance the same, then the weight of a compression structure becomes relatively better. For instance, if we increase the load a hundredfold, that is, from one ton to 100 tons, then, though the weight of a tension member has gone up at least in proportion from 3-5 kg to 350 kg, yet the weight of a single strut to carry this load over 10 metres increases only tenfold, that is, from about 200 kg to about 2,000 kg. So, in compression, it is proportionately very much more economical to support a heavy load than a light one (Figure 1). All these considerations operate in the same sort of way for panels and shells and plates and membranes as for simple struts and poles and columns (Appendix 4).

Figure 1. Diagram illustrating the relative weight-cost of carrying a given load over a distance L.

Considerations of this kind provide the rationale of things like tents and sailing ships. With such devices it pays, hands down, to collect the compression loads into a small number of masts or poles, contrived to be as short as possible. At the same time the tension loads, as we have said, are better diffused into as many strings and membranes as may be. Thus a bell-tent, which has a single pole but many guy-ropes, is likely to be the lightest ‘building' which can be made in proportion to its volume. However, almost any tent will generally be lighter and cheaper than a solid building made from timber or masonry. In the same way, a cutter or a sloop, which has a single mast, is a lighter and more efficient rig than a ketch or a schooner or any other more complicated arrangement with several masts. This is also the reason why the A-shaped or tripod masts used by the ancient Egyptians and by the designers of Victorian ironclads (Chapter 11) were heavy and inefficient.

Again, the typical vertebrate animal, such as man, is on the whole a good deal like a bell-tent or a sailing ship. There is a small number of compression members, that is, bones, more or less in the middle, and these are surrounded by a wilderness of muscles and tendons and membranes – even more complicated than the ropes and sails of a full-rigged ship – which carry the tensions. Furthermore, from the structural point of view two legs are better than four, and the centipede is perhaps only saved from total inadequacy by the fact that its legs are so short.

Scale effects – or second thoughts on the ‘square-cube law'

It will be remembered that, long ago, it occurred to Galileo that, whereas the weight of a structure increased as the cube of its dimensions, the cross-sectional area of its load-carrying members increased only as the square, and so the stress in the material of geometrically similar structures ought to increase in direct proportion to the dimensions. Thus a structure which is liable to fail by tensile fracture induced, directly or indirectly, by its own weight must be made of thicker and stockier proportions the larger it becomes. In fact, its members would have to be made disproportionately thicker and heavier than the simple rule would indicate, because there is a sort of ‘ compound interest' effect. Thus the size of all structures might be expected to be quite strictly limited.

This square-cube law has been bandied about by both biologists and engineers for a long time. Herbert Spencer and, later, D'Arcy Thompson said that it limited the size of animals, such as elephants, and engineers used to explain that it rendered impracticable the building of ships or aircraft appreciably larger than those already in existence. In spite of this, both ships and aircraft continued to get bigger and bigger.

As a matter of fact the square-cube law seems to apply with full force only to the lintels of Greek temples (which are made from weak, heavy stone), icebergs and icefloes (which are made from weak, heavy ice) and things like jellies and blancmanges.

As we have seen, in many sophisticated structures the weight of the compression members is likely to be many times greater than that of the tension parts. Since the compression members are likely to fail by buckling they will become more efficient the larger the load they are called upon to bear – that is to say, the larger the structure is made. For this reason, although there is a disproportionate increase of weight with increase of size, the penalty is very much smaller than is implied by the square-cube law. In practice this penalty may be more than offset by various ‘economies of scale'. For instance, in a ship or a fish, an aircraft or a bird, the resistance to motion will be nearly in the ratio of the surface area, and this area will diminish, proportionately to the weight, as the size increases. It was Brunei's perception of this which impelled him to design the Great Eastern. Brunei's perception was right, though his great ship was a failure, and this is why we build enormous ships, such as super-tankers, today. Furthermore, as we saw in Chapter 5 the size of large animals is more likely to be limited by considerations related to the ‘critical Griffith crack length' in their bones than by the square-cube law.

Space-frames versus monocoques

Quite frequently the engineer is faced with a choice between a lattice structure built up, Meccano-fashion, from separate struts and tension rods – which is called a ‘space-frame' – and a shell structure in which the load is carried in more or less continuous panels; this is called a ‘monocoque'. Sometimes the distinction between the two forms of construction is obscured by the fact that space-frames are covered over with some sort of continuous cladding which does not really carry much load. This is the case with traditional timbered cottages, with modern steel-framed sheds and barns (which are covered with corrugated iron) and, of course, with animals which are covered with shells or scales.

Sometimes the decision about which form to use is dictated by requirements which are not strictly structural. Thus an electricity pylon offers least wind resistance and least area of steel to paint when it is in the form of an open trellis or lattice tower. Again it is generally more convenient to make a water-tank, for instance, from a shell of thickish steel plates than in the form of a trellis supporting a water-tight bag or membrane, even though the latter form may be lighter and is, in fact, the solution usually adopted by Nature for stomachs and bladders.

Sometimes the difference in weight and cost between the two forms of construction is marginal and it may not matter very much which is used. In other cases the difference is very great. As we have seen, a tent is always much lighter and cheaper than any equivalent building made from continuous panels or concrete or masonry. In coachbuilding the old-fashioned ‘Weymann' saloon car body, circa 1930, which consisted of a wooden space-frame covered with padded fabric, was very much lighter than any of the pressed metal shell bodies which have been used since. In these days of expensive petrol the Weymann body might well be revived.

There is, however, an idea about that monocoque shells are somehow more ‘modern' and more advanced than space-frames, which are sometimes considered to be primitive and rather Heath Robinson. Although a good many engineers who ought to know better subscribe to this view, there is in fact no objective structural justification for it. When it comes to carrying loads which are primarily compressive, the space-frame is always lighter and usually cheaper than the monocoque. The weight penalty for using a monocoque, however, is less severe when the loads are high in relation to the dimensions, and this, in conjunction with other considerations, may justify the use of shells in some instances. However, for large, lightly loaded structures, such as ‘rigid' airships, the space-frame or trellis structure is the only practicable one. The alternative for lighter-than-air transport is not a vast monocoque airship made from an engineer's dream of shiny aluminium plates, but a pressurized bag or ‘blimp'.

The transition from the stick and string and fabric construction of the early aircraft to modern monocoques was not dictated by some sudden surge of fashion but was a strictly logical step in aircraft design once certain loads and speeds were reached. As we have said, regarded solely as a means of taking compression and bending, the monocoque is always heavier than the space-frame; but the extra weight required gets less in proportion as the load on the structure increases. On the other hand, regarded as a means of resisting shear and torsion, the monocoque is more efficient than the space-frame.* As aircraft speeds increase, so do the requirements for torsional strength and stiffness. There comes therefore a transition point, which was reached in the 1930s, when it pays, in terms of structure weight, to change over the construction of airframes from space-frame to monocoque. This is especially the case with monoplanes. Thus modern aircraft are usually built as continuous shells, using aluminium sheet, plywood or Fibreglass for the skin. We see an equally logical reversion to space-frame construction in modern hang-gliders, which are very light indeed.

The need to resist large torsional loads is almost confined to artificial structures such as ships and aircraft. As we said in Chapter 12, Nature nearly always manages to avoid torsion, and thus, at least as far as large animals are concerned, monocoques or exo-skeletons are uncommon. Most sizeable animals are vertebrates and therefore highly sophisticated and successful space-frames, not very different in their structural philosophy from biplanes and sailing ships. The avoidance of severe torsional requirements is very noticeable in birds and bats and pterodactyls. It is this which enabled these animals to retain their light space-frame construction when they took to the air. Aircraft designers, please note.

Blown-up structures

It is sometimes interesting to speculate about the technological ‘ifs' and ‘buts' of history. If Isambard Kingdom Brunei had come upon the railway scene a very few years earlier than he did it is probable that most of the railways of the world would have standardized on a gauge of 7 feet instead of using his rival George Stephenson's ‘coal wagon gauge' of 4 feet 8£ inches, which derived from the Roman chariots. The Stephenson gauge has proved something of a handicap, as Brunei predicted it would. If they had a wider gauge today, the railways might perhaps be in a stronger position, technically, and economically, than they are. If so, the world might be slightly different.

On the other hand, if an effective pneumatic tyre had been available around 1830, we might have gone direct to mechanical road transport without passing through the intervening stage of railways at all. In that case the present-day world would have been even more different. In fact the pneumatic tyre was invented about fifteen years too late. It was patented in 1845 by a young man called R. W. Thomson, then aged twenty-three. Thomson's tyre was surprisingly successful technically, but by that time the railways were well established, and the rail interests combined with the horse interests to promote absurd and restrictive legislation, which had the effect of delaying the development of the motor car until the turn of the century.

Since the bicycle was never thought to constitute a serious threat either to trains or to horses its development was legally permitted in Victorian times. The pneumatic tyre was revived with considerable success, for use on cycles, by J. B. Dunlop in 1888. Dunlop made a fortune out of it, but by that time Thomson was dead and his patent had expired. With solid tyres lorries are limited to something like 15 m.p.h., and cars cannot go very much faster. Thomson's invention has not only made fast and cheap road transport practicable; it has also enabled aircraft to operate from dry land. Without pneumatic tyres we should probably have to use some form of seaplane.

Tyres, of course, have the function of spreading and cushioning the load beneath the wheels of a vehicle, and in this they are extremely successful. However, tyres are really only one example of a whole class of blown-up structures. Quite apart from any cushioning effects, blown-up structures provide a very effective way of evading the serious penalties in weight and cost which are incurred when we try to carry light loads over a long distance in bending or in compression. What such a structure does is to carry the compression, not in a solid panel or column which is liable to buckle, but by compressing a fluid, such as air or water. Thus the solid parts have only to sustain tension forces, which, as we have seen, involve very much less weight and cost than compression.

In technology the idea of using blown-up structures in an intelligent way is not new. Around 1,000 B.C., the up-river boatmen of the Tigris and the Euphrates were making boats and rafts from blown-up animal skins. These boats voyaged down-stream carrying, not only produce for sale in the cities of the plains, but also mules or donkeys. On arrival at their destination, the skins were deflated and returned to their home-ports, overland, on the backs of the pack-animals. Nowadays pneumatic boats are common and so are pneumatic tents and furniture. They are often packed up and carried around on cars.

The air-supported roof was invented by the great engineer F. W. Lanchester in 1910. It consists simply of an inflatable membrane, attached at its edges to the ground. It is kept up by air at very low pressure provided by a simple fan arrangement. Although it has to be entered and left by means of an air-lock, this is not usually a very serious handicap in view of the other advantages. Lanchester's roof allows large areas to be covered very easily and cheaply, but its use is at present confined to things like greenhouses and covered tennis courts; it is prevented from being used for factories or houses by rather grandmotherly building regulations.

Of course, one does not have to use air. The sandbag is really another way of doing the same sort of thing, and so are ‘Dracone' barges, which are simply large elongated floating sacks, filled with oil or water. They are used on the upper Amazon for transporting oil and are returned, deflated (but not on donkeys), in much the same way as the skin boats of the Euphrates. They are also used to bring fresh water to hotels in the Greek islands for the baths of the tourists.

Blown-up structures probably deserve to be developed much further than they have been for technological uses. However, the great exploiters of this form of construction are plants and animals. Both plants and animals are in business as chemical factories and are, in consequence, full of complicated and messy fluids. Nothing could be more ‘natural* and economical, for instance, than to make a worm in the form of an elongated bag stuffed, so to speak, with the worm's squidgy insides.

Clearly, this works very well, and in fact it seems so natural and so economical that one wonders why animals ever bothered to acquire skeletons made from brittle, heavy bones. Would it not be much more convenient, for instance, if men were made like octopuses or squids or elephants* trunks? One view of the question, which was put to me by Professor Simkiss, is that animals never really meant to have skeletons at all; what may have happened was that the earliest bones were simply safe dumping-grounds for unwanted metal atoms in the body. Once animals had produced solid mineral lumps inside their bodies, then they might as well make use of them as attachments for muscles.

Wire wheels

It won't be a stylish marriage,

I can't afford a carriage,

But you'll look sweet upon the seat

Of a bicycle made for two!

Harry Dacre, Daisy Bell

In the traditional wooden carriage wheel the weight of the vehicle is taken in compression by each of the spokes in turn. A carriage is therefore rather like a centipede with a great many long legs which, taken together, are heavy and inefficient. This fact seems first to have dawned upon that remarkable and eccentric man, Sir George Cayley (1773-1857). Cayley was one of the earliest and most brilliant of the aircraft pioneers and he was interested in making better and lighter landing wheels for his aircraft. As early as 180 8 it occurred to him that a great deal of weight could be saved by designing wheels in which the spokes were in tension rather than in compression. This thinking led, eventually, to the development of the modern bicycle wheel, in which the wire spokes are in tension while the compressive forces are taken by the rim, which can be quite light and thin, since it is well stabilized against buckling.

In conjunction with the pneumatic tyre, the wire wheel made bicycling practicable for ordinary people – with considerable social consequences, from Daisy Bell onwards. The saving in weight is, however, mostly confined to large lightly loaded wheels, such as bicycle wheels. When the wheel becomes smaller and the loads larger there is generally not much advantage to be gained from using tension spokes. In modern sports cars pressed-steel wheels are very little heavier than wire wheels, which are usually not worth the bother and expense.

On choosing a better material – and what is a ‘better' material anyway?

Nature may be supposed to know her business when she chooses between the various possibilities in the way of biological tissues; but mere men, even very great men, seem to have the strangest ideas about materials. According to Homer, the bow of Apollo was made of silver* – a metal whose strain energy storage is negligible. In a rather later age we were told that the floors of Heaven were made of gold, or alternatively of glass: both very unsuitable substances. Poets are always quite hopeless about materials; but most of the rest of us are not much better. In fact very few people ever think rationally about the subject at all.

Quirks of fashion and prestige seem to play a large part in the matter. Gold is not really a very good material for watches, nor is steel for office furniture. The Victorians insisted on making all sorts of improbable articles, such as umbrella stands, out of cast iron, and there is the story of the African chief who had his palace made out of the same substance.

Although the choice of materials is sometimes irrational and eccentric, more often it is highly traditional and conservative. Of course there is sound reason behind a good deal of traditional materials selection, but it is so mixed up with unreason that it is difficult to separate the two. Artists from Lewis Carroll to Dali have discovered that it is possible to impart a considerable psychological shock merely by implying that some familiar object might be made from an apparently unsuitable material, such as rubber or bread and butter. Engineers are very susceptible to these effects; they would be a good deal shocked nowadays at the idea of a large wooden ship. Our ancestors were much more shocked at the idea of an iron one.

The acceptability of various materials changes with time in curious and interesting ways. Thatch is a case in poiftt. Thatch was once the cheapest and least regarded of roofing materials, but in the poorer country districts it often had to suffice even for the roofs of churches. During the eighteenth century, when these parishes became richer, subscriptions were raised to replace the thatch by slates or tiles. Sometimes the money was inadequate to do the whole job, and in these cases the thatch had perforce to be left on those areas of the church roof which were not likely to be seen by passers-by; only the side which faced the main road was tiled. Nowadays the balance of prestige is reversed, and in the Home Counties thatched roofs are the pride and joy of the wealthier of the business fraternity.

Materials, fuel and energy

The twentieth century may be known to posterity as the ‘age of steel and concrete'. It may also be known as the ‘age of ugliness', and perhaps by other unpleasant names as well, such as the ‘age of waste'. It is not only engineers who are obsessed by steel and concrete (and quite indifferent to appearances); politicians and the man in the street seem to have caught the same infection. The disease seems to have originated two hundred years ago with the Industrial Revolution and cheap coal – which led to cheap iron -which led to iron steam engines fitted to turn that coal into cheap mechanical energy: and so on round and round in ever more energy-intensive circles. Thus coal and oil store a great deal of energy packed into a small volume. Engines process a great deal of this energy very quickly and within a small space. They then deliver the energy as electricity or mechanical work in concentrated forms. On this concentration of energy our whole contemporary technology rests. The materials of this technology, steel, aluminium and concrete, themselves require a great deal of energy to manufacture them; how much energy is indicated in Table 6. Because they need so much energy to make them these materials can only be employed with profit within an energy-intensive economy. We are not only investing money capital in a technical device; we are also investing energy capital, and in both cases it is necessary to secure a fair return on the investment.

TABLE 6

Approximate energies required to produce various materials

Material n = energy to manufacture Joules × 109 per ton Oil equivalent tons

Steel (mild) 60 1·5

Titanium 800 20

Aluminium 250 6

Glass 24 0·6

Brick 6 0·15

Concrete 4·0 0·1

Carbon-fibre composite 4,000 100

Wood (spruce) 1·0 0·025

Polyethylene 45 1·1

Note. All these values are very rough and no doubt controversial; but I think that they are in the right region. The value given for carbon-fibre composites is admittedly a guess; but it is a guess founded upon many years of experience in developing similar fibres.

In spite of the high cost and increasing scarcity of energy the trend in the energy-intensive direction is increasing rather than diminishing. Advanced engines, such as gas turbines, process more and more energy, more and more hectically, within less and less space. Advanced devices require advanced materials, and the newer materials, such as high-temperature alloys and carbon-fibre plastics, consume more and more energy in their manufacture.

Most probably this kind of thing cannot go on for very much longer, for the whole system is entirely dependent upon cheap and concentrated sources of energy, such as oil. Living Nature may be regarded as an enormous system for extracting energy, not from concentrated but from diffuse sources, and then using that energy with the uttermost economy. Many attempts are on foot at present to collect energy for technology from diffuse sources, such as the sun, the wind or the sea. Many of these are likely to fail because the energy investment which will be needed, using conventional collecting structures built of steel or concrete, cannot yield an economic return. A quite different approach to the whole concept of ‘efficiency' will be needed. Nature seems to look at these problems in terms of her ‘metabolic investment', and we may have to do something of the same kind.

It is not only that metals and concrete require a great deal of energy, per ton, to manufacture (Table 6), but also that, for the diffuse or lightly loaded structures which are usually needed for systems of low energy intensity, the actual weight of devices made from steel and concrete is likely to be very many times higher than it would be if we used more sensible and more civilized materials.

As we shall shortly see, timber can be one of the most ‘efficient' of all materials in a strictly structural sense. For large dimensions and light loads, a wooden structure is many times lighter than one made from steel or concrete. One of the difficulties with timber, in the past, has always been that trees take a long time to grow and wood is slow and expensive to season.

Probably the most important development in materials during the last few years has been that made by the plant geneticists who have been breeding fast-growing varieties of commercial timbers. Thus varieties of Pinus radiata (Weymouth pine) are now being planted which, in favourable conditions, will increase in diameter by up to 12 centimetres per year and may be fit for felling, as mature timber, in six years. So there is a good prospect of timber becoming a crop which can be grown on a short time-cycle. Nearly all the energy which is needed to make it grow is provided, free, by the sun. Presumably, when one has finished with a timber structure, it could be burnt to yield up most of the energy which it has collected while it was growing. This is, of course, in no way true of steel or concrete.

Again, timber used to need lengthy and expensive seasoning in heated kilns, which used up a good deal of energy. As a result of recent research it is now possible to season sizeable soft-wood scantlings in twenty-four hours, at a very low cost. These are very important developments in relation to structures and to the world energy situation, and it behoves us to take account of them.

Some algebraical analysis of the structural efficiencies in various roles arid in terms of weight, of different materials, is given in Appendix 4. The design of a number of high-technology structures, such as aircraft, is largely controlled by the criterion E/ρ: that is to say, by the ‘specific Young's modulus' which governs the weight-cost of the overall deflections. It happens that, for the majority of traditional structural materials, molybdenum, steel, titanium, aluminium, magnesium and wood, the value of E/ρ is sensibly constant. It is for this reason that, over the last fifteen or twenty years, governments have spent such large sums of money in developing new materials based on exotic fibres such as boron, carbon and silicon carbide.

Fibres of this sort may or may not be effective in aerospace; but what seems to be certain is that not only are they expensive but they also need large amounts of energy to make them. For this reason their future use is likely to be rather limited, arjd, in my own view, they are not likely to become the ‘people's materials' of the foreseeable future.

TABLE 7

The efficiency of various materials in different roles

Young's modulus, Specific gravity,

Material E MN/m2 ρ grams/c.c. E/ρ

Steel 210,000 7·8 25,000 190 7·5

Titanium 120,000 4·5 25,000 240 11·0

Aluminium 73,000 2·4 25,000 310 15·0

Magnesium 42,000 1·7 24,000 380 20·5

Glass 73,000 2·4 25,000 360 17·5

Brick 21,000 3·0 7,000 150 9·0

Concrete 15,000 2·5 6,000 160 10·0

Carbon-fibre composite 200,000 2·0 100,000 700 29·0

Wood (spruce) 14,000 0·5 25,000 750 48·0

The requirement for a strict and expensive control of overall deflections is likely to be a very limited one; however, as we have seen, the weight-cost – and often the money cost – of carrying compressive loads is frequently very high. The weight-cost of carrying a compressive load in a column is governed, not by E/ρ, but by . The weight-cost of a panel is controlled by (Appendix 4). These requirements are summarized in Table 7. It will be seen that there is a large premium on low density; thus steel comes out rather badly, even compared with bricks and concrete. Furthermore, for many light-weight applications – such as airships or artificial limbs – wood is even better than carbon-fibre materials, besides being much cheaper.

In Table 8 these virtues are expressed in terms of energy-cost.

TABLE 8

The structural efficiency of various materials in terms of the energy needed to make them

Material Energy needed to ensure a given stiffness in the structure as a whole Energy needed to produce a panel of given compressive strength

Steel 1 1

Titanium 13 9

Aluminium 4 2

Brick 0·4 0·1

Concrete 0·3 0·05

Wood 0·02 0·002

Carbon-fibre composite 17 17·0

Here the advantage of the traditional materials – wood, brick and concrete – is overwhelming. This table makes one wonder whether the pursuit of materials based on exotic fibres is really justified. What really pays off for most of the common purposes of life is not carbon fibres, but holes. Nature tumbled to this a long time ago when she invented wood; and so did the Romans when they started to build churches from empty wine bottles. Holes are enormously cheaper, both in money and in energy, than any conceivable form of high-stiffness material. It would probably be better to spend more time and money on developing cellular or porous materials and less on boron or carbon fibres.

* * *

* For instance, A. G. M. Michell, ‘The limits of economy of material in frame structures', Phil. Mag. Series 6, 8, 589 (1904).

* Because the cross-section of a tension bar is proportional to the load, whereas the volume of the end fittings increases as the power of 3/2 of the load.

* Thinking algebraically, we can put the problem of carrying a load, P, over a length, JL, in n parallel tension bars in the form:

where Z = total weight of all the tension members, per unit length

P = total load carried

s = safe working stress

k = a coefficient connected with the cunning of the designer

W = work of fracture of the material

n = number of tension members employed

p = density of material.

The proof of this is to be found in Cox's The Design of Structures of Least Weight. I have modified Cox's formula slightly.

* i.e. for a given cross-sectional area of torsion-box.

* Neque semper arcum tendit Apollo ! (' Neither is Apollo perpetually drawing his bow', Horace, Odes II, x, 19). Horace perhaps knew that silver creeps nearly as badly as lead.

Chapter 15 A chapter of accidents

-a study in sin, error and metal fatigue

Have you heard of the wonderful one-hoss shay

That was built in such a logical way,

It ran a hundred years to a day,

And then, of a sudden, it -

第四部分 结构与审美

第 14 章

设计的哲学 —— 形状、重量与成本的平衡

哲学不过是自主的判断力。

—— 约翰·赛尔登（John Selden）

如我们所见，结构理论在日常生活中最普遍的运用，就是分析某些具体结构的行为：要么是打算建造的结构，要么是实际存在但安全成问题的结构，也可能是那些已经倒塌的相当尴尬的结构。换言之，如果知道给定结构的尺寸及其构成材料的特性，我们至少能试着预测它应该有多强以及会发生多少挠变。尽管这类计算在特定情况下显然是非常有用的，但当我们想弄懂事物为何有此形状，或者从几类不同的结构中为某个特定用途选择一个最好的结构时，这种方法只能给予我们有限的帮助。例如，在建造飞机或桥梁时，使用哪一种会更好，是由盘或板制成的连续壳体结构，还是由杆或管组成的或许还要用钢丝支撑的交叉格构？此外，为什么我们的肌肉和肌腱有很多而骨骼却较少？此外，工程师如何在种类繁多的寻常材料中做出选择？他建造结构应该用钢或铝，还是用塑料或木材？

动物、植物和传统人工制品的「设计」并不只是偶然为之。一般来说，在充满竞争的世界里经过长期演化而来的任何结构，它的形状和材料都代表了其必须承载的载荷与经济或代谢成本的最优化。在现代技术中，我们可能想要实现这种最优化，但我们并不总是擅长此道。

人们尚未广泛意识到的是，这一有时被称为「设计哲学」的课题可以以科学的方式进行研究。这是个遗憾，因为其结果在生物学和工程学领域都很重要。虽然不太受重视，但对设计哲学的研究事实上已持续多年。米歇尔（A. G. M. Michell）在 1900 年左右第一次以工程学方法严肃讨论了该课题。[1] 自伽利略提出「平方–立方律」后，虽然生物学家事实上一直在谈论（第 9 章），但直到 1917 年达西·汤普森爵士（Sir D'Arcy Thompson）出版了他的杰作《论生长与形态》（On Growth and Form），才首次有了关于结构要求对动植物形状影响的全面描述。尽管这部著作有诸多优点，但它缺乏足够的数据分析，所表达的工程学见解也并不都是合理的。虽然收获了巨大和充分的赞誉，但《论生长与形态》无论在其所处时代还是对之后的生物学思考都没有产生多少实际影响。它似乎也没有对工程师产生什么影响，这无疑是因为生物学思想与工程学思想互动的时机尚未成熟。

近年来，以数学研究结构哲学的代表人物是考克斯（H. L. Cox）。考克斯除了是一位卓越的弹性研究者外，还是一位研究童书作家比阿特丽克斯·波特（Beatrix Potter）的专家。他在某些方面有点儿像伟大的托马斯·杨，我希望他能原谅我这么说。因为他不仅具有像托马斯·杨一样的天分，还继承了托马斯·杨的很多晦涩的表达。普通人往往会发觉，若没有传道者或解释者的帮助，实在很难弄懂考克斯的阐述。这就可以解释为什么他的工作没有获得应有的关注了。接下来的内容大多直接或间接地基于考克斯的研究，让我们首先从他对承张结构的分析开始。

承张结构的设计

工程设计的奇妙之处在于，不先设计出某些可施加载荷的终端配件，就不可能制作出简单的承张构件；不论是锻铁、藤蔓、钢缆，还是绳索，终端配件上的应力体系都要比纯张力复杂得多。承张终端配件的设计在理论上有充足的空间，也有很多经验：无论是古俾格米人精通的藤蔓打结手艺，还是布鲁内尔开发的高效带环杆，经验总是会主宰设计。但是，理论家仍然拥有最终的话语权。

—— 考克斯，《重量最小结构的设计》

（The Design of Structures of Least Weight）

如果我们不必考虑终端配件的效应，那么承张结构的哲学的确非常简单。首先，与承载给定载荷相匹配的承张结构，其重量与长度成正比。也就是说，强到足以承载 1 吨载荷的 100 米长绳，其重量正好等于安全承载等量载荷的 1 米长绳的 100 倍。其次，只要载荷是均匀分配的，不管给定载荷是靠单根绳索或系杆支撑，还是靠各占一半横截面的两根绳或杆，都没有区别。

可是，这个简单的看法被终端配件的必要性搅乱了，即载荷从构件的一端移到另一端的需要。即便是一根普通的绳索，其两端也需要绳结或接头。绳结或接头可能比较重，还可能有额外的成本。如果我们老老实实地计算，这个重量和成本就必须加到裸露的承张构件上。对于给定的载荷，无论绳索是长是短，终端配件的重量和成本都完全一样。因此，在其他条件一样的情况下，就承张构件单位长度的重量和成本而言，长构件会少于短构件。换言之，重量不再与长度成正比。

此外，从这样一种系统性的代数与几何关系中可以看出，两根平行承张杆终端配件的总重量低于具有等效横截面的单根绳或杆终端配件的重量。[2] 由此可知，一般来说，节省重量靠的是在两个或更多承张构件间细分拉伸载荷，而不是用单一构件来承载它。

正如考克斯指出的那样，终端配件上的应力分布总是很复杂，而且必定包括有些严重的应力集中，以致裂缝一有机会便会扩展。因此，配给的重量和成本皆取决于设计者的技巧，也取决于材料的韧度，即材料的断裂功。断裂功越高，配件就越轻和便宜。但是，如我们在第 5 章所见，韧度很可能随抗拉强度的增加而减少。对像钢材这样常见的工程金属而言，断裂功随抗拉强度的增加而急剧下降。

因此在为承张构件选择材料时，我们通常会面临互不相容的需求问题。为了减小系杆中部或平直部位的重量，我们应该使用具有高抗拉强度的材料。但对终端配件来说，我们一般要选择有韧性的材料，这很可能意味着低抗拉强度。像许多难题一样，这一个也必须以妥协或折中的办法来解决，在这种情况下，它主要取决于构件的长度。对于很长的构件，比如现代悬索桥的钢缆，一般要选高抗拉钢，虽然我们不得不接受钢缆锚定处终端配件带来的额外重量与复杂性。毕竟，终端配件只有两个，桥梁两端各有一个，其间或许有一根 1 英里长的钢丝。因此，在中部减轻的重量会超过两端处增加的重量。

但是，当我们遇到像短环链这样的结构时，情况就完全不同了。在每节短环上，终端配件的重量很可能大于中部的重量，必须慎重考虑。老式悬索桥的支撑链就属于这种情况，这种结构一般是由有韧性、可延展和抗拉强度相当低的锻铁制成的。如我们在第 10 章所说，特尔福德的梅奈悬索桥链板环上的拉应力不到现代悬索桥钢丝的 1/10，就是因为这个绝佳的理由。非常类似的论证也适用于壳体结构，比如船舶、油箱、锅炉和主梁，它们是用较小的铁板或钢板制成的。它也适用于铆接铝制结构，比如常规的飞机。所有这些或多或少都可以被视为带有小构件的二维链。在这种情况下，需要用更弱但延展性更好的材料，否则接合处的重量会大到难以承受（见第 5 章图 5–13）。

在船舶、双翼机和帐篷上，绳索和钢丝的倍增一般会节省重量，而非增加重量。[3] 当然，所有这些翻绳游戏都会带来高风阻、高维护成本和总体的复杂性。这可能是我们为获得较低结构重量而不得不付出的代价。我们在动物身上也能看到类似的原理，大自然会毫不犹豫地增加肌肉和肌腱这样的承张构件。实际上，大自然和伊丽莎白一世时代的水手采用了同样的装置来减小端部附件的重量。许多肌腱的末端展开成扇形，弗朗西斯·德雷克爵士（Sir Francis Drake）称之为「乌鸦脚」。肌腱的每个分支都有一个与骨骼分离的小接合，重量（或许还有代谢成本）由此实现最小化。

承张结构与承压结构的相对重量

如我们在上一章所见，对给定固体来说，拉伸状态和压缩状态下的断裂应力往往是不同的；但就许多常见的材料而论，比如钢材，区别并不是太大，所以，短承张构件与短承压构件的重量很可能差不多。事实上，由于承压构件可能不需要沉重的终端配件，而承张构件需要，因此在同类条件下，短的承压支杆很可能比承张支杆更轻。

然而，随着支杆变长，欧拉理论开始发挥作用。你应该还记得，沿支柱的屈曲载荷与 1/ L2 成正比（其中 L 为柱长），而这意味着对横截面不变的支杆来说，抗压强度随长度的增加而急剧下降。因此，为了支撑任何给定载荷，长支杆需要比短支杆粗得多，也要重得多。如前文所说，同样的考虑并不适用于承张构件。

研究在 10 米（约 33 英尺）的距离上先承张 1 吨（1 000 千克或 10 000 牛顿）再承压同样的重量这个问题是具有启发性的。

承张状态：对于一根钢棒或钢缆，我们可允许拉伸状态下的工作应力达到 330 MN/m2 或 50 000 psi。考虑到终端配件，总重量可达到 3.5 千克或 8 磅左右。

承压状态：试图用实心钢棒在这样一个距离上承载这样一个压缩载荷是很愚蠢的行为，因为若实心棒粗到足以避免屈曲，那么它确实将非常沉重。在实践中，我们很可能使用直径约为 16 厘米（6 英寸）的钢管，其壁厚可能为 5 毫米（0.2 英寸）。这样一根管重 200 千克或 450 磅左右，换句话说，其重量在承拉杆的 50~60 倍之间，其成本很可能符合同样的比例。此外，如果我们要细分一个承压结构，其情况不会更好，反而会变得更糟糕。如果我们要支撑 1 吨的载荷，不是靠单根支杆，而是靠某种像桌子似的 4 根支杆排布，每根长 10 米，那么支杆的总重量将会是原来的两倍，即 400 千克或 900 磅。重量持续增加，结构越分越细，事实上随 n 而增加，其中 n 为支柱的数量（见附录 Ⅳ）。

如果我们增加载荷而保持距离不变，那么承压结构的重量情况会变得更好。例如，如果我们将载荷增大到 100 倍，即从 1 吨到 100 吨，那么虽然承张构件的重量至少会按比例从 3.5 千克增大到 350 千克，但承担这个载荷的 10 米长单根支杆的重量只增大至原来的 10 倍，即从约 200 千克增大到约 2 000 千克。所以，在承压状态下，支撑重载荷比支撑轻载荷在比例上要经济得多（见图 14–1）。无论是对于板、壳、盘和膜，还是对于简单的杆、竿和柱，所有这些考虑都是以同样的方式运作（见附录 Ⅳ）。

图 14–1 在距离 L 上承载给定载荷的相对重量成本

这类考虑为帐篷和帆船等提供了理论依据。有了这样的装置，就能轻而易举地将压缩载荷集中在少量尽可能短的桅杆或支柱上。同时，如我们所说，拉伸载荷会更好地分散到尽可能多的弦和膜上。因此，一顶只有单根支柱但有许多拉索的钟形帐篷很可能是可按体积比例制造的最轻的「建筑物」。几乎所有帐篷都会比用木料或砖石建成的实体建筑物更轻，也更便宜。同样，具有单根桅杆的纵帆艇或纵帆船，比起双桅纵帆船、多桅纵帆船或者其他更复杂的多桅帆船，其帆装更轻也更有效。这也是为何古埃及人和维多利亚时代的装甲舰设计者使用的 A 形或三脚桅杆既笨重又低效（第 11 章）。

此外，典型的脊椎动物，比如人类，大体上很像钟形帐篷或帆船。中部有少量承压构件，即骨骼，周围则遍布承载张力的肌肉、肌腱和薄膜，甚至比全帆装船的帆装还复杂。此外，从结构学角度来看，两条腿要好于四条腿，而蜈蚣之所以避免了总体上的官能不足，也许只是因为腿短。

规模效应

还记得很久以前，伽利略曾想到，鉴于结构的重量随其尺寸的立方增加，而负载构件的横截面积仅随尺寸的平方增加，所以在几何上相似的结构，其材料中应力的增加应与其尺寸成正比。由此可见，对于易因自重直接或间接引发拉伸断裂以致失效的结构，尺寸越大，其比例上就一定越粗壮。事实上，由于存在一种「复利」的效应，其构件肯定会比简单规则表明的更粗也更笨重。因此，可以预料所有结构的大小都可能会受到相当严格的限制。

这个平方–立方律长期以来一直被生物学家和工程师到处传播。先是赫伯特·斯宾塞（Herbert Spencer），之后是达西·汤普森，都说过它限制了像大象这样的动物的大小，而且，工程师们过去常解释说，它使建造比既有的那些还要大的船舶或飞机沦为空想。尽管如此，船舶和飞机还是变得越来越大了。

实际上，平方–立方律似乎只适用于希腊神庙的楣（用脆弱且沉重的石块建成）、冰山、冰川（由脆弱且沉重的冰构成），以及果冻和奶冻之类的东西。

如我们所见，在许多精致的结构中，承压构件的重量很可能是承张部分的几倍。因为承压构件很可能因屈曲而失效，所以要想让它们变得更有效，它们需要承受的载荷就要更大，即该结构就要建造得更大。出于这个原因，虽然重量会随大小不成比例地增加，但其害处比平方–立方律揭示的要小得多。在实践中，这个害处可能大于各种「规模经济」的抵偿。例如，对于一艘船、一条鱼、一架飞机或一只鸟，运动的阻力几乎与表面积成比例，随着尺寸的增加，这个面积会与重量成比例地减小。这一领悟促使布鲁内尔设计出大东方号。虽然他的巨轮失败了，但布鲁内尔的认识是正确的，这也是为何我们今日可建造像超大油轮这样的大船。此外，如我们在第 5 章所见，大型动物的尺寸更有可能受限于其骨骼的「临界格里菲斯裂缝长度」，而非受到平方–立方律的制约。

空间构架和单壳构造

工程师常常面临一个选择：一边是以分离的支杆与承张支杆按组装式玩具风格搭建的格构，即所谓的「空间构架」；另一边是以或多或少的连续板负载的薄壳掩构，即所谓的「硬壳式结构」。有时候，两种结构的区别会被一个事实掩盖，即空间构架会被某种连续包覆盖住，而该包覆其实无法承载过多载荷。传统的木屋、现代钢架工棚和仓库（覆盖以波纹铁），当然还有身披甲壳或鳞片的动物，都属于这种情况。

有时候，具体使用哪种形式，未必完全取决于结构上的要求。高压输电塔采用了开放的格架或格栅形式，因为这样它就具备了最小的风阻和最小的漆钢面积。但是，如果需要制造一个水箱，采用厚钢板壳体往往比用格构支撑防水袋或防水膜更方便，即便后一种形式可能更轻。事实上，它通常也是大自然用于胃和膀胱的解决方案。

有时候，两种构造形式间的重量和成本差异是微不足道的，到底用哪种可能无关紧要。但在其他情境中，差别会非常大。如我们所见，一顶帐篷总是比用连续板、混凝土或砖石建成的任何等效建筑物更轻也更便宜。在车身设计制造中，1930 年左右的老派「魏曼式」轿车车身，是由木制空间构架覆以衬垫织物构成的，它比此后一直使用的压制金属壳体车身都要轻得多。在油价高企的今日，魏曼式车身很可能会复兴。

然而，有一种观念认为，硬壳式结构在某种程度上比空间构架更「现代」也更先进，后者有时被视为原始和相当华而不实的。虽然许多工程师应该更认同这种观点，但事实上它缺乏客观的结构性依据。当主要承载的是压缩载荷时，空间构架总是比硬壳式结构更轻，往往也更便宜。但是，当与尺寸相关的载荷较高时，使用硬壳式结构在重量上的劣势就不那么严重了，再结合其他考虑因素，就可以证明在某些情况下使用壳体是合理的。然而，对轻负载的大型结构，比如「刚性」的飞艇来说，空间构架或格构是唯一可行的一种形式。一个用工程师梦寐以求的闪亮铝板制成的巨型硬壳式结构飞艇是无法成为比空气轻的运载器的，一个密封增压袋或「软式飞艇」（blimp）则可以。

从早期飞机的杆、绳与织物构造到现代硬壳式结构的变迁，并非都是因某些风潮而突然兴起的，而是达到一定载荷和速度后飞机设计中顺理成章的步骤。如我们所说，仅作为一种承压与承弯方式的话，硬壳式结构总是比空间构架更重；但所需的额外重量会随结构上载荷的增加而按比例减少。而且，若是作为抵抗剪切和扭转的方式，硬壳式结构比空间构架更有效。随着飞机速度的提升，对抗扭强度和抗扭刚度的要求也会提高。因此，20 世纪 30 年代迎来一个转折点，就结构重量而言，是时候将机身构造从空间构架转变成硬壳式结构了。单翼飞机的情况尤其如此。因此，现代飞机往往被建造成连续壳体，用铝板、胶合板或玻璃纤维做外壳。同样合乎逻辑的回归也体现在现代悬挂式滑翔机的空间构架上，它们的确非常轻。

抵抗大扭转载荷的需要仅限于像船舶和飞机这样的人造结构。如我们在第 12 章说过的那样，大自然几乎总是设法避免扭转，因此，至少就大型动物而言，硬壳式结构或外骨架并不常见。最大的动物是脊椎动物，它们具有高度精密且成功的空间构架，其结构哲学与双翼飞机及帆船没有多大区别。在鸟类、蝙蝠和翼龙身上，这种避免严重扭转的需要则表现得非常显著。正是这一点使这些动物能够在空中维持其轻巧的空间构架。飞机设计师，请注意了。

鼓胀结构

有时，推测技术史上的那些「如果」和「但是」是一件有趣的事。如果伊桑巴德·金德姆·布鲁内尔早几年投身铁路建设，或许世界上大多数铁路会以 7 英尺轨距为标准，而非使用其对手乔治·史蒂芬孙的 4 英尺 8.5 英寸的「煤车轨距」，后者源于罗马战车的轮距。正如布鲁内尔预测的那样，史蒂芬孙的轨距已被证明是某种障碍。如果今日有更宽的轨距，那么铁路在技术上和经济上可能更强大。果真如此的话，世界也可能会略有不同。

如果高效的充气轮胎在 1830 年左右问世，那么我们可能已直奔机械化的公路运输而去，而无须经历铁路运输的中间阶段。果真如此的话，今日的世界就会有所不同。事实上，充气轮胎的发明比 1830 年晚了 15 年。1845 年，一位名叫汤姆逊（R. W. Thomson）的年轻人取得了充气轮胎的专利，当时他只有 23 岁。汤姆逊的轮胎在技术上取得了惊人的成功，但那时铁路的地位稳固，而铁路利益与马车利益的联合推动了荒谬的限制性立法，致使汽车的发展推迟至 19 世纪和 20 世纪之交。

因为自行车从未被当成对火车或马车的严重威胁，所以其在维多利亚时代的发展是受到法律允许的。1888 年，邓禄普（J. B. Dunlop）成功复兴了充气轮胎，将之用于自行车。邓禄普从中大赚一笔，而那时候汤姆逊已死，他的专利也过期了。使用实心轮胎的卡车车速被限定在每小时 15 英里左右，轿车也不能跑得更快。汤姆逊的发明不仅使快速且廉价的公路运输成为可能，还使在旱地上操纵飞机变成现实。没有充气轮胎的话，我们大概只能使用某种形式的水上飞机了。

当然，轮胎有分散和缓冲车轮下载荷的功能，而且它们在这方面格外成功。然而，轮胎其实只是鼓胀结构的一个例子。除缓冲效应之外，鼓胀结构还提供了一个非常有效的方式，有助于我们试图在承弯或承压状态下长距离地承载轻载荷时，规避重量和成本方面的劣势。这样一个结构的功能就是承压，不是通过易于屈曲的实心板或实心柱，而是靠压缩空气或水之类的流体。因此，实心部分只能承受张力，如我们所见，其涉及的重量和成本要比承压情况下少得多。

在技术领域，巧妙地使用鼓胀结构的观念并不新鲜。早在公元前 1000 年左右，底格里斯河与幼发拉底河上游的船夫就开始用鼓胀的兽皮制作小艇和筏子了。这些小艇顺流而下，不仅要承载到下游平原城邦出售的商品，还要运载骡子或毛驴。抵达目的地后，人们会把兽皮放气，再放到驮畜的背上，沿陆路返回船籍港。如今，充气艇是常见之物，充气帐篷和充气家具也一样。它们通常会被打包装到汽车里。

1910 年，伟大的工程师兰彻斯特（F. W. Lanchester）发明了充气屋顶。其构成仅仅是一个边缘附着于地面的充气膜，依靠一台简单的风机提供的低压空气维持。虽然进出都需要依赖一个气闸，但鉴于有其他益处，这往往不算一个非常严重的障碍。兰彻斯特的屋顶可以很容易地覆盖大块面积，而且成本不高，但其使用目前仅限于像温室和室内网球场这样的地方；由于古旧的建筑规章，它不得被用于工程或房屋。

当然，并不是非用空气不可。沙袋也可以达到同样的目的，比如海龙状驳船，它们就是装满石油或水的大型加长浮袋。在亚马孙河上游，它们被用来运输石油，返程时的放气方式和幼发拉底河上的兽皮艇差不多。它们还被用来给希腊诸岛的旅馆提供游客沐浴所需的淡水。

比起在技术领域发挥的现有作用，鼓胀结构或许值得我们进一步开发。然而，这种构造形式的伟大开发者是植物和动物。植物和动物都像化工厂一样运营，其结果是它们内部充满了复杂和肮脏的流体。例如，用细长的袋子制作一条蠕虫，袋子里装满了蠕虫湿软的内脏，没有比这更「自然」和更经济的了。

显然，这非常有效，但事实上，它使人们忍不住想知道为何动物要费劲儿地使用由又脆又重的骨骼制成的骨架。比如，如果人类被「制造」得像章鱼、乌贼或大象鼻子一样，岂不是更方便吗？西姆基斯教授为我提供了一个看待该问题的角度，即动物其实根本不打算要骨架；可能发生的情况是，最早期的骨骼不过是动物体内多余的金属原子的安全倾倒场地罢了。一旦动物体内产生了固体矿物质块，它们也将被用作肌肉的附件。

钢丝辐轮

不会有时髦的婚礼，

四轮马车，我负担不起，

但是你的快乐

来自一辆双座自行车！

—— 哈利·戴克（Harry Dacre），《黛茜·贝尔》（Daisy Bell）

在传统的木制马车轮子上，每根辐条轮流承受车辆重量的压缩。因此，马车有点儿像长着许多长腿的蜈蚣，这些腿合在一起，既笨重又低效。领悟该事实的第一人是非凡而古怪的乔治·凯莱爵士（Sir George Cayley）。凯莱是最早和最杰出的发明飞机的先驱者之一，他的志趣在于为他的飞机制造更好且更轻的着陆机轮。早在 1808 年他就想到，大部分重量的节省可以通过将轮子的辐条设计为承张而非承压状态来实现。这个想法最终引领了现代自行车车轮的发展，其钢丝轮辐处于拉伸状态，同时相当轻薄的轮辋承受了压力作用，因为它能稳定地抵抗屈曲。

再配以充气轮胎，就这样钢丝辐轮使骑自行车对普通人来说变得可行，而且由前面的《黛茜·贝尔》可知，它还有相当大的社交意义。但是，重量的节省多半仅限于轻负载的大轮子，比如自行车车轮。当车轮变小而载荷变大时，使用承张轮辐往往没多大好处。现代跑车的冲压钢制车轮比钢丝辐轮重不了多少，这通常不值得人们费心和花钱。

如何选择更好的材料

大自然或许应该清楚它在生物组织的各种可能性之间做选择时肩负的职责；但是渺小的人类，即便是非常伟大的人物，似乎也对材料不甚了解。按荷马的说法，阿波罗之弓是用白银做的 [4]，而这种金属存储的应变能可忽略不计。到了相当晚近的时代，我们被告知天堂之地是用黄金或玻璃铺就的，但这两种材质都极不适用。诗人总是对材料漠不关心，但余下的大多数人也没好到哪里去。事实上，根本没几个人对这个问题做过理性的思考。

时尚与名声的巧合似乎在这件事上起到了巨大的作用。黄金其实不是一种非常好的手表材料，钢材也不适用于制造办公室陈设。维多利亚时代的人坚持制造各式各样不可能的物品，比如铸铁材质的雨伞架，有一个故事说某位非洲酋长用同样的材质建造了宫殿。

虽然材料的选择有时是不合理又古怪的，但在大多数情况下，仍然是十分传统和保守的。当然，许多传统材料的选择背后也有充分的理由，但因为合理与不合理的理由混杂在一起，以至于很难区分。从刘易斯·卡洛尔（Lewis Carroll）到达利（Dali），艺术家们发现仅是揭示某个我们熟悉的对象可能是用橡胶或生活必需品等明显不合适的材料制成的，就有可能造成相当大的心理冲击。工程师极易受到这些效应的影响，如今建一艘巨型木船的想法会让他们大吃一惊。然而，我们的祖先面对铁船的概念则会更加震惊。

人类对不同材料的接受度会随时间以奇妙有趣的方式改变。茅草屋顶就是一个绝佳的例证。茅草曾是最便宜也最不被当回事儿的屋顶材料，但在较为贫困的乡村地区，即便是教堂顶，往往也不得不用它们来铺设。18 世纪，随着这些乡村变得富裕起来，人们会用筹集的捐款购买石板或瓦片来替换教堂屋顶上的茅草。有时候，资金不足以完成整个工程，在这种情况下，他们会将茅草留在那些不易被路人看见的屋顶区域，而在面向主干道的屋顶区域则会铺上瓦片。如今，事情出现了反转，在伦敦周边各郡茅草屋顶成了商界人士引以为傲的财富象征。

材料、燃料与能量

20 世纪可能会被后世称为「钢材与混凝土的时代」，它也可能被称为「丑陋的时代」，或许还有其他不中听的名字，比如「浪费的时代」。不仅是痴迷钢材和混凝土（而对外观漠不关心）的工程师，政客与路人似乎也感染了同样的「病」。这种病可能源于 200 年前的工业革命与廉价的煤（又带来了廉价的铁），它使得铁制蒸汽机足以将煤转化为便宜的机械能：在能量越来越密集的循环里，往复不休。因此，煤炭和石油存储的大量能量被塞进小型体积中。发动机在很小的空间内非常迅速地处理了大量能量，然后它们会以电功或机械功的形式集中输出能量。我们所有的当代技术都依赖于这种能量的汇集。这项技术的材料 —— 钢材、铝材和混凝土 —— 本身就需要大量的能量来制造，表 14–1 显示了它们需要多少能量。因为需要这么多的能量来制造，这些材料就只能在能量密集型经济中使用并获利。我们不仅为技术设备投入货币资本，还得投入能量资本，两种投资都有必要确保合理的投资回报。

表 14–1 生产不同材料所需能量的近似值

注：所有这些数值都非常粗略，无疑也是有争议的，但我认为它们都处于正确的区间。碳纤维复合材料的取值无疑是个估测值，但它是基于多年开发同类纤维的经验得到的。

尽管能量的成本很高且日益稀缺，但能量密集化的趋势只增不减。先进的发动机，比如燃气涡轮机，在越来越小的空间内越来越繁忙地处理越来越多的能量。先进的设备需要先进的材料，而更新颖的材料，比如高温合金与碳纤维塑料，在制造过程中又会消耗越来越多的能量。

想必这种方式的确不能持续太久，因为整个系统完全依赖于廉价而集中的能源，比如石油。生物界可被视为一个庞大的能量提炼系统（能量的来源不是集中的而是分散的），再以最经济的方式使用这些能量。目前，正在进行的许多尝试是从分散的来源收集技术所需的能量，比如太阳、风或者海洋。其中许多尝试很可能会失败，因为所需的能量投入 —— 采用常规的钢制或混凝土制的收集结构 —— 不能产生经济回报。我们需要用完全不同的方法来处理「效率」的整体概念。大自然似乎是根据它的「代谢投入」来看待这些难题的，我们可能也需要这样做。

不仅是每吨金属和混凝土都需要大量能量来制造（见表 14–1），而且对低能量密集度系统通常所需的分散或轻负载结构而言，用钢材和混凝土制成的设备的实际重量，很可能比我们使用更合理和更文明的材料要高出许多倍。

我们很快会看到，从严格的结构学意义上说，木料是最「有效」的材料之一。对于大尺寸和轻载荷的情况，木制结构比钢制或混凝土制结构要轻得多。在过去，围绕木料的困难之一一直是，树木生长要花很长时间，而木材价格的涨落会随季节变化。

最近几年，材料领域最重要的发展或许是植物遗传学家的功劳，他们培育出快速生长的商用木料品种。因此，如今种植的美国五叶松在顺利的情况下，其直径每年会增加 12 厘米，6 年后便可长成适于砍伐的成熟木材。所以，木材具有优良的收获前景，它们可以在短时间周期内长成，而其生长所需的能量几乎都是由太阳慷慨赠予的。据推测，当有人用完一个制木结构时，可以通过燃烧方式释放其木料在生长过程中收集的大部分能量。当然，钢材或混凝土不行。

此外，木料过去常常需要在加热窑炉中进行漫长又昂贵的干燥处理，这也得消耗大量的能量。近期的研究结果表明，现在我们可以以非常低的成本在 24 小时内完成相当大的软木方材的干燥处理。这些都是关乎结构和世界能源形势的非常重要的发展，我们理应有所考虑。

附录 Ⅳ 给出了关于不同作用结构的效率和不同材料的重量的一些代数分析。许多高技术含量结构的设计，比如飞机，主要受制于 E/ρ 准则，即「比杨氏模量」，它控制着总挠度的重量成本。碰巧的是，对于大多数传统结构的材料，比如钼、钢、钛、铝、镁和木材，E/ρ 的值应是常数。正是出于这个原因，在过去的 15 或 20 年里，政府投入巨额资金来开发基于硼、碳和碳化硅之类的新奇纤维的新材料。

这类纤维在航空航天领域可能有效，也可能无效；但似乎可以确定的是，它们不仅很昂贵，还需要消耗大量的能量来制造。出于这个原因，它们未来的用途很可能相当有限，在我看来，它们在可预见的将来不太可能成为「大众材料」。

严格又昂贵地控制总挠度的要求，可能效果非常有限；然而，如我们所见，承载压缩载荷的重量成本 —— 经常还有资金成本 —— 往往非常高。立柱承载压缩载荷的重量成本不是受制于 E/ρ，而是取决于；板的重量成本则受制于（附录 Ⅳ）。表 14–2 汇总了这些要求。显然，低密度的情况有很高的溢价。因此，钢材的表现相当糟糕，甚至比不上砖块和混凝土。而且，对许多轻量级的应用，比如飞艇或假肢，木材甚至比碳纤维材料更好，而且更便宜。

表 14–2 不同作用的各种材料的效率

在表 14–3 中，这些长处体现在能量成本上。在这里，传统材料 —— 木材、砖块和混凝土 —— 的优势是压倒性的。这张表让人想弄明白，追求基于奇特纤维的材料是否真的合理。就大多数常见的生活用途而言，真正可获利的材料不是碳纤维，而是孔洞。很久以前，当大自然创造出木头时，它就领悟出这个道理了；当古罗马人开始用空葡萄酒瓶建造教堂时，亦同此理。不论是在资金上，还是在能量上，制造孔洞都比使用任意可能形式的高刚度材料更便宜。或许更好的做法是，把更多的时间和金钱花在开发蜂窝材料或多孔材料上，而少投入到硼或碳纤维上。

表 14–3 不同材料（依据制造所需能量）的结构效率

这些数据统一以低碳钢为单位基准，且仅为近似值。

[1] 可参考 A. G. M. Michell,「The limits of economy of material in frame structures」, Phil.Mag. Series 6, 8, 589 (1904) 。

[2] 因为承张杆的横截面积与载荷成正比，而终端配件的体积随载荷的 3/2 次幂增加。

[3] 以代数方法来思考，我们可以将 n 个长为 L 的平行承张杆上承载载荷 P 的问题转化为如下形式：

其中，Z = 所有承张构件单位长度的总重量，P = 总承载载荷，s = 安全工作应力，k = 与设计者才智相关的一个待定系数，W = 材料的断裂功，n = 承张构件的数量，ρ= 材料密度。

这个式子的证明详见考克斯的《重量最小结构的设计》，我已对考克斯的公式略做修正。

[4]「阿波罗也无法一直拉开他的弓」（Horace, Odes II, x, 19）。贺拉斯或许知道白银的蠕变几乎同铅一样严重。

