Told of President Lincoln

Once upon a time I used to work in an explosives laboratory. Naturally very thorough precautions were imposed by the authorities against the entry of unauthorized persons, who not only might sell stolen explosives for a large profit, but might equally well blow the whole place up. Thus this establishment was ringed with barbed wire and alarm bells and armed guards and police dogs and with nearly every device that the ingenuity of security officers could think of.

Now many practical explosives are based on nitro-glycerine, which, by itself, is an exceptionally dangerous liquid both to store and to handle. The least undue familiarity, such as shaking the bottle, may cause it to detonate with the most appalling results, Ordinary safe explosives, such as dynamite, contain a large amount of nitro-glycerine which is only rendered safe to handle by the addition of various substances that have been developed over the years by a succession of rather brave scientists, such as Abel and Nobel. Those who have to experiment with straight nitroglycerine need to take the most fantastic precautions, and the dangers are such that they not infrequently suffer from nervous breakdowns. Not only are nitro-glycerine laboratories physically separated from other buildings by earthen embankments and wide open spaces, but the staff often wear special clothing, including a peculiar kind of boot devised so that they may tread softly and build up no electrical charges, let alone anything so dangerous as a spark.

One week-end some of the local children managed to wriggle under the security fence and to evade the police and their dogs. Finding themselves in an apparently lonely place, they broke into one of the nitro-glycerine laboratories. There was, however, nothing very much there to interest them, so they upset the various bottles and beakers of nitro-glycerine on to the floor, stole a couple of pairs of special boots and escaped, by the way they had come, undetected from that day to this.

This is a true story; but I rather think that it might also serve as some sort of parable, for it is possible that engineers and planners and bureaucrats and do-gooders and all the company of the avant-garde are like children playing in a shed full of nitroglycerine – sublimely unaware that they may cause a major explosion. It is all very well to concentrate on ‘efficiency' and making things work, and of course, it is necessary to meet material needs – though in fact our material needs are more flexible than we like to think. However, people have subjective needs which are more important and much more likely to lead to social explosions if they are abused or neglected.

So, when I listen to some of my engineering colleagues talking, I sometimes shake in my shoes. It is not only that they regard the aesthetic consequences of their work as of quite minor importance but that they regard concern about it as basically frivolous. Yet I think that the more we increase material prosperity, the more serious in the long run will be the ultimate catastrophe if people cannot find aesthetic satisfaction.

When I was an engineering student I used to escape from my classes, panting for air, and creep guiltily to the local museum. Many a mathematical lecture did I cut, spending the time looking at the pictures in the Glasgow Art Gallery. No doubt pictures in museums do help, but in a way such things are a pathetic necessity, a refuge of desperation, not only from the aridities of analytical lectures but, more important, from the all-pervasive ugliness of towns like Glasgow.

Of course it suits the tidy philistine administrative mind to keep ‘art' in separate boxes called museums and theatres, and it is noticeable that the brave new 1984 regimes provide not only pictures in galleries but also music and ballet. But such forms of ‘fine art' can only operate occasionally in the ordinary person's life. They may provide an escape, but they are really no substitute for an environment which is satisfying in itself and is continually present. Most of us find some sort of refreshment in the countryside, but we are pretty well resigned to the dreariness of towns and factories and filling stations and airports and most of the things with which we have to spend our day. Possibly fish which have to live permanently in dirty water may get more or less used to it – but human beings who are conditioned in this way ought to rebel.

We ‘Compound for sins [we] are inclined to/By damning those [we] have no mind to.' And, as Professor Macneile Dixon once said,

... contrast the middle centuries, that unique period in our European annals, with the centuries following upon the Renaissance. How different their respective views of the world, how opposed their systems of belief! Yet in each the doctrines universally held are felt as inevitable, as unassailable. Each age thinks itself in possession of the true and only view possible for sensible man.*

Thus, about the important things, each age has a totally closed mind. Nowadays, being materialists, we are duly horrified that our ancestors were prepared to tolerate physical poverty and to inflict physical pain. But these same ancestors would be just as horrified that we should suffer many millions of people to experience every day the beastliness of London or New York; and that those who work in our Dark Satanic Mills should have to be well paid to put up with noise and ugliness which are largely unnecessary. Even the ‘clinical' decor and atmosphere of modern hospitals would seem to them to add a new terror to dying. Therefore many of us seek some kind of relief or consolation in ‘Nature‘ and we escape, when we can, to the country, because we find the countryside more agreeable than towns and roads and factories. Many people indeed believe that Nature is in some way inherently beautiful and, perhaps, in some way inherently ‘good'. Taken to the extreme such views lead to something very like Pantheism – to Meredith's Woods of Westermain. But it seems to me that, if we can only get rid of our romantic prejudices and really look at all sides of the question we are forced to the view that Nature is just as aesthetically neutral as she is morally neutral. Mountains and lakes and sunsets may be beautiful, but the sea is often menacing and ugly, and, so far as I have experienced them, primeval forests are frequently places of horror. Most of the European landscape is not really ‘natural' at all. The kinds of plants and trees which are allowed to grow have been carefully selected and controlled, and many species have been artificially bred to their present forms, just as much so as the domestic animals. The patterns in which the plants are grown, the whole lay-out of fields and woods and hedges and villages – not to mention drainage and land improvement – are the result of human choice and effort.

Before the eighteenth century, when most landscape was much wilder, educated men had a dread of ‘Nature', which implied to them not only physical discomfort, but Pan in the raw. To these people it was the towns which were habitable and attractive, the country which was inhospitable and ugly. Today, when we admire the lovely English landscape we are really admiring something which was deliberately created by the civilized and intelligent English eighteenth-century landlords.

If the country has gone up in the aesthetic world, the towns have certainly come down. Nowadays when we deplore English towns and factories we are deploring the product of philistine reformers and engineers and architects and businessmen and the little grey men who sit in council offices and the bigger grey men who sit in Parliament. Of these people's sins, it is not enough to say that they know not what they do; for we do that which is inherent in our natures – as Plato well knew. It is at least arguable that the countryside is more attractive than the town not because the country is more ‘natural' but because town and country were made, by and large, by very different kinds of people. But the first thing is to see ugliness for what it is rather than accepting it as part of the natural order of things.

We do that which is inherent within us. In a world which has an unreasonable admiration for reason we are apt to forget that the human mind is rather like an iceberg. The rational part of our minds, of which we are conscious, is quite small, and, like the visible part of the iceberg, it is supported from underneath by the subconscious mind, which is much larger.

At this point I am only too acutely aware that we are reaching a stage in the argument which is the province of artists and philosophers and psychologists and that I am miserably qualified to blunder into regions where the angels of art criticism fear to tread. I can only plead that necessity knows no laws, that the modern man-made world is hideous, that sheer desperation induces me – a naval architect manque – to stick my neck out, I think it is really important that some sort of view of the aesthetics of technology and engineering and structures should be put forward to engineers and technologists by one of themselves, however inadequate that view may be. For what follows I commit myself to Athena and to Apollo – by their grace may somebody more competent than myself be provoked into doing the job better.

Let us begin by looking at the human reception process in aesthetics; that is to say, why we react as we do to some inanimate object. Within the subconscious mind there lies an enormous store of potential reactions and ‘forgotten' memories. This material is partly inherited genetically from a remote past (Jung's ‘collective unconscious') and partly acquired by the individual himself during the course of his own life, mainly from apparently forgotten experiences – sometimes unpleasant ones. Now our physical senses – sight, hearing, smell and touch – continually pass to our brains far more information about our surroundings than our conscious mind can accept or be aware of. But the subconscious is monitoring this information all the time and it is full of receptors and trip-wires which are liable to be influenced by every shape and every line, every colour and every smell, every texture and every sound. We may be totally unconscious of this, but it is happening all the same and it is building up subjective emotional experiences within us – be the effects good or bad.

This sort of process may account in some measure for the way in which we are influenced, subjectively, by inanimate objects and especially in the present context by artefacts. Artefacts are made by people and somebody, at some stage, has some sort of choice in the shape and the design.

It is impossible to make any object without making a series of statements in the process. Even a straight line is saying in effect ‘Look, I am straight, not crooked.' Even a very simple artefact contains a package of such statements which have been made by people.

Just as there can be no such thing as a totally objective experience, so there can be no such thing as a totally objective statement – one with no emotional connotations of any kind. This is true whether the statement be made in words or music or colour or shape or line or texture or in what engineers call design.

This brings us from what might be called the ‘aesthetic reception process' to the ‘aesthetic transmission process'. In other words, how do things come to be designed as they are? What is it that the maker or the designer puts into an artefact which causes it to have the aesthetic effects which it does? The short answer is, to a large extent, ‘His own character and his own values.'

Thus whatever we make and whatever we do we nearly always leave upon the thing or upon the action the imprint of our personalities, written in a code which can usually only be read at the subconscious level. For instance our voices, our handwriting and our manner of walking are quite characteristic and are usually difficult to disguise or to imitate. But this sort of thing extends much further than these familiar examples. One dark evening I was in a yacht anchored in a remote Scottish loch. Round the corner of the land, three or four miles away, there came another sailing yacht which I had never seen before and of which I had no knowledge. Though it was quite impossible to recognize her name or her crew I said to my wife ‘That boat is being sailed by Professor Thorn.' And so she was – for the way in which a man sails a ship to windward is quite as individual as his voice or his writing, and, once seen, can hardly be forgotten. In the same way one can often tell which of one's friends is flying a light aircraft, for the manner of flying shows, unmistakably, the imprint of the character. In the field of painting and drawing, even the work of very amateur performers is apt to tell one more about themselves than about their subjects. Again, it requires exceptional skill to imitate really plausibly the work of a particular artist. Naturally there is no sharp line between painting and drawing and technological design, and almost everything that gets made is likely to carry with it something of the personality of the maker.

What is true of individuals is also apt to be true of a society, a culture or an age. Archaeologists can usually date artefacts, such as potsherds, within a very few years on ‘stylistic' grounds. If you walk around Pompeii and Herculaneum, you will come away with a quite surprisingly powerful sense of what sort of people the inhabitants were. This has little or nothing to do with the technology of things like the plumbing, and it is something which no amount of factual history can convey. So far this sort of pattern recognition has eluded the computer; long may it continue to do so.

Recently, I was drinking canned beer with a much respected colleague. I said – rather unwisely and priggishly, I suppose -'Really a thing like this beer-can seems to me to epitomize all the dreariness and commercialism that is wrong with technology nowadays.*

My much respected colleague was down on me like a ton of bricks. ‘I suppose you want to sell beer in pitchers or wooden barrels or wine-skins or something. What else would you sell beer in in this day and age except tin cans? How stupid and impractical and reactionary can you be V

But, with respect, my much respected colleague was missing the whole point. It is not what you do but how you do it that matters. Beer containers are not beautiful or ugly because of the material from which they are made, or even because they are mass-produced. Whatever they are made out of they will convey, unavoidably, the values of the people who are responsible for them. We happen to be a society which is unable to make attractive beer-cans. Indeed we are, I fear, an age rather noticeably lacking in inherent grace and charm.

Greek amphorae were beautiful, not because they held wine and were made of clay, but because the Greeks made them. They were, in their day, simply the cheapest containers for wine. If the Greeks had made tin beer-cans perhaps we should now have collections of classical beer-cans in museums, much admired by artists.

I believe that very few artefacts are intrinsically ugly or beautiful simply because of their function*; they are rather mirrors to an age, to a set of values. Rather the same conditions obtained during the eighteenth century as in Ancient Greece – partly no doubt because it was a classical age which consciously modelled itself on the ancient world. Nearly everything the eighteenth-century craftsman touched was elegant. This was not just a matter of the luxury trade; it extended right through society.

Of course this begs the whole question of ‘absolute' standards in aesthetics. Are not ‘my' values as good as ‘yours', however deplorable and uneducated you may consider my taste to be? Well, I for one feel strongly that there are absolute standards in aesthetics which change only gradually through the ages. The modern fashion for ‘aesthetic democracy' seems to me perverse and nihilistic and based largely on a desire to bash the Establishment. I would take the view that there is a continuing tradition of values in aesthetics – just as there is in ethics. The process is an iterative one, advancing slowly and painfully from age to age and from fashion to fashion, building, like science, on the experience of the past. Otherwise how are civilized values ever to be built up?

Another debatable point is ‘Granted that common objects such as Greek amphorae were beautiful in some absolute sense, did the Greeks realize that they were beautiful?' I am reminded of a remark in a leading article in The Times, which said something like ‘Good typography should be like clean glass – one should be able to see through it without being distracted. But if this is to happen then the typography must have that sort of discreet elegance and beauty which draws no attention to itself.' I think this is why we only come to appreciate many common artefacts after they have passed out of common daily use. This does not mean that they are not absolutely and permanently beautiful.

And the eighteenth century invented the Industrial Revolution. I think it is important to point out that many of the fathers of the Industrial Revolution were not philistines but sensitive men of considerable taste. Of such a kind were Matthew Boulton (1728-1809) and Josiah Wedgwood (1730-95). They made a great deal of money, the things they made were beautiful, and these two at least were model employers. No doubt there were black sheep, but the evils of the Industrial Revolution did not lie in the ethic of eighteenth-century culture and classicism but rather in a newly arisen vulgarity and greed which came, I think, from outside this ethic.

Neither mass-production machinery itself nir its products are intrinsically ugly. The very first real mass-production machinery, the well-known block-making equipment installed around 1800 at Portsmouth Dockyard by Sir Marc Brunei, is handsome and satisfying. These machines were not only good-looking but also verv effective, for they turned out automatically all the millions of pulley blocks needed by the sailing navy during the Napoleonic Wars and for long afterwards. They saved a vast amount of money in doing so, for blocks are expensive things and a single warship might require 1,500 of them. Some of this machinery can now be seen in the Science Museum (Plate 21), but a good deal of it is still in service at Portsmouth after 180 years, supplying the modern navy's diminished need for blocks. Not only the machinery but the product, the blocks themselves, is solid and handsome; whether you would call a block beautiful is a matter of opinion but they are certainly pleasant to look at.

Sir Marc – father of the great Isambard Kingdom Brunei – was a French royalist emigre, and all accounts agree that he was a charming man. We are told that

The dear old man had, with a great deal more warmth than belonged to that school, the manner, bearing and address and even the dress of a French gentleman of the ancient regime, for he had kept to a rather antiquated but very becoming costume. I was perfectly charmed with him at our first meeting. What I loved in old Brunei was his expansive taste and his love or ardent sympathy for things he did not understand or had not had time to learn. What I most admired of all was his thorough simplicity and unworldliness of character, his indifference to mere lucre, and his genuine absent-mindedness. Evidently he had lived as if there were no rogues in the world.

No doubt a very impractical sort of character who would find difficulty in getting a job with a modern go-ahead firm. But his machinery is still producing blocks, nearly two hundred years after he made it – and it is beautiful.

The great engineers who worked before and immediately after 1800 between them laid the foundations, not only of British industrial prosperity, but of the modern technological world. Many of these people were men of taste. But by the time Queen Victoria came to the throne public taste was undoubtedly deteriorating: by 1851 it had reached an all-time low. Shrewd observers, like Lord Playfair (1818-98), were, however, already remarking, as early as the time of the Great Exhibition, that British industry was losing its impetus and its creativity. Although it is very widely and commonly believed – indeed taken as axiomatic – that ugliness came in with industrialism as an inescapable consequence of mass-production, I doubt if this view would really stand up to proper historical examination. I think it is more reasonable to suppose that elegance and business enterprise declined more or less hand in hand and as a result of something rather nasty and complacent which emerged from the British character during the Age of Reform.

The passionate protest of the Aesthetic movement in the 1870s and 1880s against the ugliness of pretty well everything failed to have much effect. I think this was less because these people were guyed by Gilbert and Sullivan in Patience and in the pages of Punch than because the movement was largely an escapist one and attacked the wrong targets. These sons of Mary failed to see that the root cause of all the brazen horrors which they hated so much lay, not in machinery itself, but in attitudes of mind. Like so many aesthetic reformers, they rejected technology instead of joining it. Perhaps if they had been prepared to learn technology and engineering they might have operated from within the system. But this is a laborious discipline which too many Arts people reject as being somehow beneath them. Of course William Morris and his followers studied and practised various small-scale technical crafts; but what was needed was to come to terms with real mass-production machinery and with the economic problems of a high-production society.

On efficiency andfunctionalism

But when his disciples saw it they had indignation, saying, ‘To what purpose is this waste? For this ointment might have been sold for much, and given to the poor.'

Matthew 26.8-9

Although we may justly accuse modern engineers of philistinism, nearly all of them do cling to certain very important values which are unfashionable and unpopular in a permissive age. The chief of these are objectivity and responsibility. Engineers have to deal, not only with people and all their quirks and weaknesses, but also with physical facts. One can sometimes argue with people, and it is not difficult to deceive them; but it is of no use to argue with a physical fact. One cannot bully it or bribe it or legislate against it or pretend that the truth is something different or that the thing never happened at all. Laymen and politicians may create what fantasies they choose, but, for the engineers, ‘It is their care that the gear engages; it is their care that the switches lock.' Essentially, these people's stuff must work, and go on working, safely and economically. It may be the engineer's job to point out that the emperor has no clothes on, but however embarrassing this may be, we clearly need more, not less, of this kind of realism.

In the pursuit of their objective profession, engineers have developed a number of concepts which are useful as aids to realism. One of these is ‘efficiency'. Thus it is very helpful to know what fraction of the expensive energy which is fed into an engine as fuel emerges as useful power. This can be expressed as a simple ratio or percentage, and it tells us a most important fact about one aspect of the working of the engine. Again, it is valuable to be able to compare the weights and costs and load-carrying capacities of various kinds of structures. As we saw in Chapter 14, there are various numerical ways of doing this.

But the concept of efficiency is so useful, and sometimes so economically powerful, that there is a danger of being carried away by it. If we try to apply the idea of efficiency to the totality of a situation, then we are usually presuming to a wisdom, to a knowledge of all the facts, which is most unlikely in mortal man. We may fairly talk of the efficiency of an engine in terms of fuel consumption and power output: if we talk of the ‘efficiency of the engine' – tout court – we are being hubristic. We take no account, for instance, of the noise and smell which the engine makes. Or whether the man who has to start it is likely to have heart failure. Or how much pleasure anybody derives from its appearance*

Even if we know all the relevant facts about any technological situation, which is impossible, we could not weight them or quantify them, for many of them are incommensurable. Not long ago there was a great to-do about the proposal to build a vast airport on the Essex coast. This was a project to put down a hideous mass of concrete and sheds and machinery upon the wet, ribbed sands of the Thames Estuary, where the gulls paddle and wheel and squawk. The politicians and the administrators and the economists and the engineers were full of facts and figures about the need for another airport. But it is impossible by any numerical criterion to compare the claims of the planners and the economists With the rights of the gulls and with the beauty of the wet sands: For myself, I am passionately on the side of the gulls, and it gives me immense pleasure to think of all those miles of wet sand and mud, which, I am glad to say, is quite useless and unproductive. So far, the gulls and the sands seem to be winning.

I suppose that it is possible to measure the ‘efficiency' of an airport in terms of how many aircraft and passengers it can handle in relation to the capital costs and running costs, and these figures have some practical value, even if they bear no relation in this world to seagulls and wet sand. But for many things the concept of efficiency is simply irrelevant. It is meaningless to talk about the ‘efficiency' of a piece of furniture or of a cathedral. All the same, engineers cling to the idea that it ‘ought' to be possible in some way to measure the ‘efficiency' of practically everything. But this is nonsense.

‘Very well,' says the engineer, ‘but things must be functional; the beauty of technology lies in its functionalism.' If by this he means that things must work and do their job properly, then he is merely stating the obvious. But when we come to apply functionalism as an aesthetic criterion we are apt to get into some very deep water. There are certain structures, such as bridges, where the structural function is simple and obvious and proclaims itself as such. Many of these are beautiful, but some of them are not. There are also a certain number of very expensive artefacts which are certainly good-looking, such as Concorde and the Rolls Royce car. But are we sure that we are not admiring perfection of workmanship, purchased almost regardless of cost? Ought we not to take cost into account in assessing functionalism?

Now a Ford car can be bought for something like a tenth of the cost of a Rolls, and in the real world, where things have to be paid for, many people would regard the Ford, as more ‘functional* than the Rolls. But the external appearance of the Ford bears little relation to its mechanical workings; what we see is more or less a tin box put round the machinery by the bodymakers and the stylists. The mechanical, that is to say, the functional, parts of any modern mass-produced car are not attractive, being made largely from bits of wire and bent metal which we find it difficult to admire, however useful they may be.

In the same sort of way, most electrical devices such as wireless sets are hideous in their naked wiry state, and we are constrained to hide them inside black or grey or walnut boxes. On the whole it may be fair to say that, as modern technology gets more and more functional, we can less and less bear to look at it.

But have we not good precedents in Nature? The outside of a person or an animal may be very beautiful; the inside is generally repulsive. Our admiration of Nature is highly selective. We admire certain stages of growth (lambs but not foetuses); we are generally horrified by decay and all those worms. But decay is just as necessary and just as functional as growth.

With regard to this question of functionalism and ‘efficiency' Nature seems to have a sense of humour, or perhaps just a sense of proportion. She will construct the stem of a plant, for instance, with the uttermost regard for metabolic economy; the thing is a miracle of structural efficiency. Having done this, she will put a great big flower on top – for fun, as far as one can see. In the same way, peacocks have tails and girls have hair which cannot be considered strictly functional. If it be urged by some dreary person that these things are done to encourage reproduction, this is only putting the argument back by one notch. For why should these ornaments be attractive, sexually or otherwise?

Although it is practically an article of religion with many engineers to believe in a close connection between functional ‘efficiency' and appearance, I am, myself, sceptical. Of course, the grossly ineffectual will, and should, offend the eye, but I doubt if the refinements of technical performance really improve appearance very much. Very often it is the other way round; the pursuit of the last ounce of performance results in a boring appearance, as one can see in modern yachts. For myself, I stick to the belief that what one gets aesthetically from an artefact is some combination of the personality of the maker with the accepted values of hisage. If you walk down any street with your eyes and your mind open you can form your own judgement on both.

‘Science' has been attacked on almost every conceivable ground ever since the Renaissance; most of these attacks were more or less rubbish. But it is always strange to me that what seems the real argument against science is seldom raised, at least in a direct form. This is that science has subtly warped our system of values by teaching us to judge on grounds which are excessively functional. The modern man asks ‘What is this man or this thing for?' rather than ‘What is this man or this thing?' Herein, no doubt, lie the causes of many of our modern sicknesses. The aesthetic judgement seeks, however inadequately, to answer the broader and the more important question. Too often nowadays our subjective judgement clashes with our scientific (or banausic) judgement. But we sweep the aesthetic judgement under the carpet at our peril.

Naturally there is nothing in all this to prevent a beautiful object from also being an efficient one. The point I am making is that the two qualities are what the mathematician would call ‘independent variables'. I am reminded of the Irish yachtsman's remark:' An ugly ship is no more attractive than an ugly woman -however fast she may be'.

On formalism and stresses

Modern art and architecture make a great parade about their freedom from traditional forms and conventions – which is possibly why they have achieved so little. Yet formality in design or in manners is not a handicap; such conventions protect the weak and aid the strong. All the loveliest ships have been designed within a stylistic tradition, and I cannot imagine that their designers felt cramped by it. The Greek dramatists wrote within a strict set of rules, but it would be as absurd to think that the Antigone is limited by the dramatic unities as to suppose that Jane Austen would somehow have been able to produce greater masterpieces if she had felt free to make use of bad language and overt sex. Of course, fully to appreciate formal achievement it is necessary to have some knowledge of the rules. This applies just as much to the appreciation of cathedrals and bridges and ships as it does to watching cricket. This provides one good reason for knowing something about the principles of engineering as well as the history of art and architecture.

When Ictinus designed the Parthenon in 446 b.c. he worked within the well-established Doric order of architecture. The Parthenon, the Temple of the Maiden, is indisputably one of the most beautiful buildings in the world – possibly the greatest of all artefacts. Although it is dedicated to the divine Athena it is, to me, the supreme statement of humanism – of what the scientist Humphry Davy called the ‘brilliant but delusive dreams concerning the infinite improvability of man'. Furthermore, it was built at the very peak of Athenian power and glory and it speaks of the city of the Maiden,

Rich and renowned and violet-crowned,

Athens the envied of nations.

Nemesis, of course, lay just around the corner, very much as it did in 1914. When it was new, in all its white marble, red and blue paint and gilded bronze, the Parthenon might have been just a little vulgar, like some of Kipling. But is not great art always a little vulgar? If the Parthenon is a monument of humanism, some of the earlier Doric temples, say those of Paestum, seem to me to express a moving religious feeling. Contrariwise, the Temple of Hephaistos in Athens, I think, conveys very little – except a faint whiff of commercialism, like Birmingham Town Hall. Yet all these different effects were produced by architects working within a single rigid language.

As with all great art there are many ways of interpreting the Parthenon. What is beyond argument is the magnitude of the achievement. But how did Ictinus do it, working as he did within a strict stylistic convention? Naturally, only one man really knew the answers and that was Ictinus himself; he wrote a book about it, which is now lost. We can, however, make some rather crude analytical observations.

In the traditional, formal steam yacht, grace and majesty are produced by extreme delicacy and subtlety and harmony in the curves of the hull and the sweep of the sheer – by the exact and loving placing of masts and funnel and superstructure (Plate 22). Mutatis mutandis, this is like the exact and loving placing of words in writing. Ship design differs from the creation of poetry only in its numerate content. So again in Doric architecture, it is the loving attention to detail which is important. Although it appears to be rectangular, there is scarcely a straight line in the Parthenon, and few lines are truly parallel. The seventy-two columns are inclined towards each other in such a way that, if produced, they would all meet at a single point, about five miles up in the sky. The eye, which expects a simple box-like structure, is deceived and enchanted by subtlety after subtlety. Like a clever woman, the Parthenon influences us and bewitches us, though we are scarcely aware of how it is done – or even that it is happening at all (Plate 23).

But what has all this to do with stresses? In one sense a great deal; in another very little. As long ago as the seventeenth century, Fenelon observed that classical architecture owes its effects to the fact that it appears to be heavier than it really is, Gothic to the fact that it appears to be lighter than is really the case. In this respect there appears to be no aesthetic pay-off from honest functionalism – from appearing to be just as heavy as you really are.

The classical orders, especially Doric, appear almost to stagger under the burden of their own weight. In fact there is really very little load in most of the columns, but the swelling or ‘entasis* which is given to them provides a sort of Poisson's ratio effect to convince us that they are bulging under the compressive stress. This bulging effect is carried still further by the swelling, cushion-like capitals or ‘echinoi' which transmit the compressive load from the lintels to the heads of the columns. The effect of weight is enhanced still further by the excessive depth of the architraves.

Although classical architecture operates on the emotions, at least in part through a subjective sense of stress, its beauty has little or nothing to do with modern ideas of structural efficiency, in the sense of the one-hoss shay. All these buildings were, in fact, thoroughly inefficient. The compressive stresses were absurdly low, while the tensile stresses in the lintels were far too high, often dangerously so (Chapter 9). The roofs of classical buildings, as we have seen, can only be described as a structural mess. But there is nothing wrong with most of these buildings aesthetically.

When we come to consider Gothic architecture, the compressive stresses in the masonry are, as a rule, a good deal higher than they are in classical buildings, and the structure as a whole is generally more stable, in spite of its airy-fairy appearance. The effect of lightness is, however, achieved, in part, by the use of pointed arches, which, again, are ‘inefficient'. These Gothic structures are, to the modern functional mind, excessively complicated. The real heroes of Gothic cathedrals seem to be the statues, whose weight, perched on pinnacles and flying buttresses, keeps the thrust lines stable (Chapter 9).

Structurally ‘inefficient' as ancient buildings may have been, it does seem that the eye requires some subjective sense of stress if it is to find satisfaction in looking at a structure. In many modern buildings the load-bearing structure, which is often of reinforced concrete, is hidden away inside the building. All that the external observer can see is a curtain wall or ‘cladding' of thin brick or glass which is obviously inadequate to carry any load at all. I do not think I am alone in finding these buildings unsatisfactory to look at and often downright ugly.

But supposing that we had some kind of structure whose means of support were clearly visible, and which was also highly ‘efficient ‘ in the modern manner, what might we expect it to look like? Clearly this is a subject about which one could argue for a long time. However, if we may judge from the structures which are employed for landing on the Moon – in which weight has been saved regardless of cost, the ultimate in one-hoss shays – the answer seems likely to be ‘Hideously ugly'.

On skiamorphs, fakes and ornament

The earliest surviving buildings of consequence in Greece are Mycenaean and date perhaps from some time before 1,500 b.c. These buildings were made of stone and seem to have been deliberately and intelligently designed as structures suited to the characteristics of that material. The Mycenaeans were well aware, for instance, of the danger of excessive tensile stresses in stone lintels, and they made adequate provision to relieve the bending loads on their stone beams, as one can see in the Lion Gate at Mycenae (Plate 24). To this extent, at least, Mycenaean architecture can be described as ‘structurally functional'.

When the Mycenaean civilization collapsed, around 1,400 b.c, Greece seems to have reverted to a dark and illiterate age, from which no buildings of any importance survive. No doubt people lived and worshipped in wooden huts of one kind or another. When formal architecture began to revive in early Archaic times, perhaps about 800 B.C., the early temples were built of wood, like the New England churches.

Naturally, none of the original wooden temples has survived. However, the transition from wood to stone construction seems to have been a piecemeal process; as timber became scarce, decayed wooden members were replaced by stone copies. Pausanias speaks of a temple still existing at Olympia in the second century a.d. in which some of the wooden columns still remained, mixed with more recent stone ones.

Doric architecture is thus ‘trabeate' or beam architecture, based on wooden construction; and even when temples came to be built, de novo, entirely of stone, architects still stuck to the forms and proportions which were suited to timber. Not only did classical architects of the sophisticated fifth century use weak stone beams in the place of wooden lintels; they went to the trouble of copying in marble all sorts of irrelevant constructional details, such as the ends of the wooden pegs which had once held the wooden buildings together.

The result ‘ought' to have been ridiculous, but it was not; it was gloriously and triumphantly successful and has served as a model for the civilized world, on and off, for two thousand years. Survivals of this sort are known as ‘skiamorphs' (shadow shapes), and in one form or another they are very common in technology, A modern instance is the survival of timber graining on the surfaces of plastic mouldings and furniture.

Contrary to the whole ethic of the functionalist school of engineering aesthetic thought, skiamorphs are not necessarily shoddy or vulgar. Nowadays, of course, they very often are; but surely this is because of our own faulty execution, not because there is something inherently wrong with the idea.

The development of the Watson steam yacht is a splendid example of a successful skiamorph. The classical form for large steam yachts was evolved in latish Victorian times by the greatest of all yacht designers, G. L. Watson (who had for his epitaph ‘Justice to the line and equity to the plummet'). For his fully powered vessels Watson retained, not only the graceful ‘clipper' bow of the sailing ship, but also the now functionless bowsprit. The result is one of the most beautiful ship conventions which has ever been developed (Plate 22).

If all this be so, what are we to think about ‘honesty' in design? Honesty compels me to say ‘Not much'. If skiamorphs are permissible in Greek temples and steam yachts, what are we to think of the total ‘fake'? Is there any reason why we should not dress up suspension bridges as medieval castles, motor cars to look like stage coaches, or yew-trees to look like peacocks?

Personally I am rather in favour of it. After all, the results could hardly look worse or more depressing than the results of modern functionalism, and they might be a lot more fun. What is wrong with eighteenth-century ‘Gothick' buildings? The best of them are tremendous fun and perfectly lovely. Horace Walpole was no fool, and the Pavilion at Brighton is a delight.

第 16 章

效率与美感 —— 逃不掉的现实

「为什么不让斯密斯先生进你的内阁，总统先生？」

「我不喜欢他那张脸。」

「但是，那个可怜人又改变不了他的脸！」

「任何人过了 40 岁都能。」

—— 有关林肯总统的故事

我曾经在一个炸药实验室工作。当然，有关部门采取了非常严密的预防措施，禁止未经授权者进入，这些人不仅可能为了巨额利润而偷炸药去卖，还很有可能把整个地方炸毁。因此，这个机构四周遍布着带刺的铁丝网、警铃、武装警卫、警犬，以及安保官员绞尽脑汁想到的几乎每一种手段。

现在，许多实用的炸药都是基于硝化甘油制成的，硝化甘油本身就是一种格外危险的液体，不论是储存还是操作。最不起眼的动作，比如摇动瓶子，就可能把它引爆，造成最可怕的后果。普通的安全炸药，比如甘油炸药，其中含有大量硝化甘油。要想安全地操作硝化甘油，只能靠添加各种物质，这些添加剂是多年以来由像阿贝尔和诺贝尔这样一批相当勇敢的科学家开发出来的。这些直接用硝化甘油做实验的人需要采取最好的预防措施，还得常常遭受神经衰弱的折磨。不仅要将硝化甘油实验室通过土堤和开阔的空间与其他建筑物在物理上隔离开，工作人员还得经常身着专用工作服，包括一种特别设计的长靴，使他们可以平缓地行走而不积累电荷，更不用说像电火花这么危险的东西了。

有一个周末，一些当地的小孩设法从防护栏下爬了进去，并且避开了警卫和他们的狗。他们闯入一间硝化甘油实验室，发现自己置身于一个人迹罕至的地方。然而，那里没有令他们感兴趣的东西，所以他们将盛有硝化甘油的各种瓶子和烧杯打翻在地，偷了一双专用长靴后就溜走了。顺便说一句，他们至今未被查出来。

这是一个真实的故事，但我宁愿把它当作一则寓言，因为工程师、规划者、官僚、帮倒忙者和所有标新立异者都可能像这些小孩一样，在一个满是硝化甘油的房间里玩耍，而丝毫察觉不到他们可能会引发一场大爆炸。专注于「效率」和让事物发挥功用是非常好的事，当然，满足材料需求也是必要的，但事实上我们的材料需求比我们想象的可能更灵活多变。然而，人们的主观需求更重要，若被滥用或忽视，也更有可能引发社会骚乱。

所以，当听到我的工科同行谈论某些事情时，我经常会吓得两腿哆嗦。他们不仅对自己作品的美感毫不在意，还把对审美趣味的关注一概视为不务正业。而我认为，从长远看，如果人们的审美需求得不到满足，物质越充裕，最终的灾难也会越严重。

当我还是一名工科生时，我常常逃课，气喘吁吁又鬼鬼祟祟地溜进当地的博物馆。有一门数学演讲课，我逃过很多次，把这些时间都花在了欣赏格拉斯哥美术馆的画作上。博物馆里的画作无疑是有帮助的，但在某种程度上，这是一种可怜的需要和绝望的庇护，不仅是为了逃离枯燥乏味的分析性讲座课，更重要的也是为了逃离像格拉斯哥这样的城镇的无处不在的丑陋。

当然，将「艺术」装进名为博物馆和剧院的不同盒子里，可以匹配相当庸俗的管理思维，但值得注意的是，这种美丽的乌托邦式政权不仅在美术馆里展出画作，还演奏音乐和表演芭蕾。但是，这种形式的「艺术品」只能偶尔在普通人的生活中起作用。它们可以提供一个逃避现实的机会，但它们确实无法代替本身令人满意且持续存在的环境。我们中的大多数人都在乡村发现过某种振奋精神的东西，但我们还得勉强忍受沉闷的城镇、工厂、加油站、机场和大部分每天不得不面对的东西。或许，不得不长期待在脏水里的鱼或多或少会习惯这样的生活，但囿于这种困境的人类应当反抗。

我们「倾向于加重罪过 / 通过诅咒那些（我们）没想到的罪过」。迈克尼尔·狄克逊（Macneile Dixon）教授也说过，

…… 比之于中世纪，那个欧洲史册中独一无二的时期，文艺复兴以来的数个世纪是截然不同的。它们各自的世界观极其不同，它们的信仰体系存在强烈的冲突！然而，不论在哪个时期，人们普遍持有的信条都被视为不可避免和无懈可击。每个时代都自以为拥有真理，唯理智者可能看到。[1]

因此，对于重要的事情，每个时代的思考都是完全封闭的。如今，作为唯物主义者，我们对我们的祖先竟做好准备忍受物质上的贫困和身体上的痛苦感到吃惊。但是，祖先也会震惊于如今有数百万人每天都要忍受伦敦或纽约的污秽，以及在黑暗的撒旦磨坊工作的那些人为获得高薪而不得不忍受毫无必要的噪声和丑陋。即便是现代医院的「门诊」布局和氛围，在他们看来似乎也会增加人们对死亡的恐惧。因此，我们中的许多人会奔向「大自然」去寻求某种解脱或安慰，我们会尽可能地逃往乡村，因为我们发现乡村比城镇、马路和工厂更令人愉悦。许多人真的相信大自然在某种程度上是天生丽质的，或许也是天赋「美好」的。这样的观点一旦走向极端，就会导致泛神论之类的东西，比如梅瑞迪斯的《西部林地》（Woods of Westermain）。但在我看来，如果我们只抛弃我们的浪漫偏见并正视问题的方方面面，那么我们不得不接受这样的观点，即大自然在审美方面并不偏颇，就像它在道德上不偏颇一样。山脉、湖水与日落可能是美的，但大海通常是险恶又丑陋的，据我的经验，原始森林往往是恐怖之地。大多数欧洲景观一点儿也不「天然」。允许种植的植物和树木的种类都是经过仔细挑选和把控的，许多物种是经人工培育长成现在的形态的，就像家畜那样。植物的种植模式，以及田野、树林、树篱和村庄的整个布局 —— 更不用说排水渠和田地的改善 —— 都是人为选择与努力的结果。

18 世纪之前，大部分景观都野性得多，那时受过教育的人对「大自然」心存一种恐惧，它不仅意味着身体的不适，还有赤身裸体的潘神。对他们来说，城镇是宜居和迷人的，而乡村则不适宜居住而且丑陋不堪。今天，当我们欣赏优美的英格兰风光时，它其实是 18 世纪有教养又有智慧的英格兰庄园主刻意创造的东西。

如果乡村在审美世界的地位有所提升，那么城镇的地位一定会下降。如今，当我们强烈谴责英格兰的城镇和工厂时，我们谴责的其实是庸俗的改革者、工程师、建筑师、商人及市政部门的小政客和议会的大政客的「作品」。这些人的罪过不在于他们对其所为知之甚少，毕竟我们的所为乃是循天性而动 —— 柏拉图深谙此理。但我们至少要认识到，乡村之所以比城镇更吸引人，并不是因为乡村更「自然」，而是由于城镇和乡村大体上是由迥然不同的人建成的。最重要的是分辨出什么是丑陋，而非将之当作事物的天然秩序的一部分。

我们所做的事反映了我们的心智。在一个对理性有着非理性崇拜的世界，我们容易忘记人类的心智就像一座冰山。我们心智中有意识的理性部分相当小，就像冰山的可见部分，支撑它的是下面大得多的潜意识。

此时我非常清楚地意识到，我们的探讨触及了艺术家、哲学家和心理学家的领地，我也极有可能误入艺术批评的「好好先生」都不敢涉足的领域。我只能申辩，事急无定法，现代的人造世界十分丑陋，十足的绝望驱使我 —— 一位失意的船舶工程师 —— 铤而走险。我认为真正重要的是，技术、工程和结构的某种审美观应由工程师和技术专家独立提出，不论这种观点有多么不充分。接下来，我把自己托付给雅典娜和阿波罗，希望借他们的恩典，能有比我更称职的人将这项工作做得更好。

让我们先来看看人类感受美的过程，即为什么我们会对某些无生命的事物产生反应。在人类的潜意识中存储着大量的潜在反应和「被遗忘」的记忆。这种素材部分遗传自遥远的过去（荣格的「集体无意识」），部分获取于个体自身的人生经历，主要来自明显被遗忘的体验，有时会令人不快。现在，我们的身体感官 —— 视觉、听觉、嗅觉和触觉 —— 持续不断地向我们的大脑传送我们周围的信息，这远多于我们的意识心理能接收或注意到的信息。但是，潜意识一直监控着这些信息，它布满了感受器和绊网，易于感知每一种形状、线条、色彩、气味、质地和声音。我们可能完全没有察觉到这件事，但它仍会发生并在我们内心逐步建立起主观的情感体验，不论效果好坏。

这类过程多少可以解释我们感知无生命物体的主观方式，尤其是在如今人工制品大行其道的背景下。人工制品是人制造的，某人在某个阶段会对形状和设计做出某种选择。

不在过程中做出一系列表达，就不可能形成任何物体。即使是一条直线，实际上也一直在说「看，我是直的，不是弯的」。即便是非常简单的人工制品，也包含一系列这样的人为表达。

就像不可能存在纯粹的客观经验之类的东西，也不可能有纯粹的客观表达 —— 不带任何情感内涵的表达。这对任何形式的表达都成立，不论是语言、音乐、色彩、形状、线条、质地，还是被工程师称为设计的东西。

这将我们从所谓的「美的感受过程」带入了「美的传递过程」。换言之，东西是如何被设计成这种样子的？制作者或设计者把什么放入了人工制品，使之具有审美效应？在很大程度上，简短的回答是，「他自身的性格与价值观」。

因此，不论我们制造何物和做何事，我们几乎总会在物或事上留下我们个性的印迹，写下通常只有潜意识才能解读的密码。例如，我们的声音、字迹和步态都相当独特，通常很难伪装或模仿。但是，有种东西要比这些熟悉的例子扩展得更远。某天深夜，我在一艘停泊在苏格兰一处偏远海湾的游艇上。在陆地的一隅，三四英里之外，又驶来了一艘我之前从未见过也全然不知的风帆游艇。虽然识别船名或船员是根本不可能的，但我对我的妻子说「驾船的是汤姆教授」。结果确实如此，因为一个人迎风驾船的方式就像他的嗓音或笔迹一样独特，而且一旦看见，就很难忘掉。同样，一个人经常能分辨出是他的哪一个朋友在驾驶一架轻型飞机，因为驾机风格可以明白无误地展示出人的性格印迹。在绘画领域，即便创作者非常业余，其作品也倾向于更多地表达创作者自身，而非创作主题。此外，要想以假乱真地模仿一位独特艺术家的作品，必须有非凡的技巧。在绘画和工艺设计之间是没有明确的分界线的，几乎任何制造出来的东西都很可能带有与制作者个性相关的某些东西。

对于个体成立的东西往往对于社会、文化或时代也成立。考古学家通常能根据「制造风格」，将陶片等人工制品的最早出现时间精确到几年之内。如果绕庞贝古城和赫库兰尼姆古城走一遭，你离开时就会强烈地感受到生活在此地的居民是什么样子。这几乎无关于管道工程之类的技术，也是再多的史实都无法传达的东西。到目前为止，这种类型的模式识别仍不为计算机所理解，这种情况可能还会持续很长时间。

最近，我和我的一位备受尊敬的同事一起喝罐装啤酒。我有点儿妄自尊大地说：「在我看来，像啤酒罐之类的东西，实乃当今技术沦丧后一切沉闷与钻营之缩影。」

我那位同事以泰山压顶之势责问我：「我想你的意思是要将啤酒装在陶罐、木桶或酒囊等容器里售卖。在今时今日，除了锡罐，你还能把啤酒装在哪里售卖？你得有多么愚蠢，多么不切实际，多么因循守旧？」

但是，恕我唐突，他漏掉了所有的重点。重要的不是做什么，而是怎么做。啤酒容器的美丑并非源于制造它们的材料，也并非因为它们是规模化生产的产物。不管是用什么做的，它们都不可避免地传递出其制造者的价值观。我们处在一个不能制造出好看的啤酒罐的社会群体中。我真正害怕的是，我们所处的时代明显缺乏内在的优雅与魅力。

古希腊的双耳细颈瓶很漂亮，不是因为它们可盛放葡萄酒，也不是因为它们的制造材料是黏土，而是因为它们是古希腊人做的。在那个时代，它们不过是最廉价的盛酒容器。如果古希腊人造出了锡制啤酒罐，或许今天的博物馆里将会收藏一些古典时代的啤酒罐，让艺术家大饱眼福。

我相信，极少有人工制品仅因其功能而在本质上存在美丑之分 [2]，它们更像一个时代和一套价值观的镜子。与古希腊颇为相似的环境出现在 18 世纪，在一定程度上，这无疑是因为该时期在有意效法古典时期。18 世纪的工匠触及的每一样东西几乎都是优雅的。这不仅是奢侈品行业的情况，也径直蔓延至整个社会。

当然，这便引出了有关审美的「绝对」标准这个问题。不管你认为我的品位有多么不堪、多么粗鄙，「我」的价值观就一定不如「你」的价值观吗？不过，我个人强烈感觉到，审美是有绝对标准的，只不过它会随时间逐渐改变。在我看来，「审美民主」的现代风尚是没有道理也没有意义的，它主要是基于抨击权势阶层的欲望。我的观点是，审美价值观存在一种持续的传统，就像伦理价值观一样。这是一个反复的过程，缓慢而艰难地前行，从一个时代到另一个时代，从一种风尚到另一种风尚，就像科学一样建立在过去经验的基础上。否则，文明的价值观是如何逐步建立起来的？

另一个争论点是：「假设希腊双耳细颈瓶等普通物体从某种绝对意义上说是漂亮的，那么希腊人意识到它们的美了吗？」我想起伦敦《泰晤士报》头版文章中的一句评论，大概是说，「好的版式应该像干净的玻璃，人应该能够一眼看穿而不分心。但是，如果这种情况发生了，那么该版式肯定具备那种低调的优雅和美丽，本身并不引人注意」。我认为，这就是为什么我们总是在许多寻常的人工制品从日常生活中谢幕后才想起欣赏它们，但这并不意味着它们就不具备绝对和永恒的美丽。

18 世纪孕育了工业革命。我认为需要重点指出的是工业革命的许多奠基人并非庸俗市侩之辈，而是颇具品位的敏锐之人，比如马修·博尔顿（Matthew Boulton）和约书亚·韦奇伍德（Josiah Wedgwood）。他们挣了一大笔钱，制造的东西也很漂亮，至少堪称模范雇主。虽然肯定有害群之马，但工业革命的罪恶不在于 18 世纪的文化和古典主义的伦理规范，而在于一种新近出现的粗鄙和贪婪之风，我认为它们来自伦理规范之外。

对规模化生产来说，无论是机器本身还是其产品，本质上都不丑陋。第一批真正意义上的规模化生产机器，即众所周知的滑轮制造设备，是由马克·布鲁内尔爵士于 1800 年左右在普茨茅斯造船厂制造出来的，样式美观而且功能完善。这些机器不仅好看，而且非常有效，因为在拿破仑战争期间及之后的很长时间里，它们自动生产出风帆舰队所需的数百万个滑轮组。由此省下了一笔巨款，因为滑轮组是昂贵的东西，而一艘战舰可能就需要 1 500 套滑轮组。这类机器中的一些如今能在伦敦科学馆中看到（见插图 21），其中很多在 180 年后仍在普茨茅斯运行，满足着现代舰队逐渐下降的滑轮组需求。不仅是这种机器，还有其产品（滑轮），都是结实和美观的。滑轮是否称得上漂亮，这因人而异，但它们看上去的确令人愉悦。

马克爵士 —— 伟大的伊桑巴德·金德姆·布鲁内尔的父亲 —— 是一位流亡的法国保王党成员，所有记载都证明他是一个有魅力的人。我们被告知：

这位仁慈的老人比那所学校的人要热情得多，其法兰西绅士范的礼仪、举止、谈吐乃至着装都遵循着古制，因为他一直穿着相当古旧却极其合身的服装。第一次会面，我就完全被他迷住了。我仰慕的是老布鲁内尔的豪爽品位，以及他对尚不明白或还没时间学习的东西倾注的爱或热情。其中，我最钦佩的是他那如赤子般纯真与超然物外的个性，以及他不汲汲于富贵和忘却得失的态度。他仿佛活在一个魑魅魍魉绝迹的世界里。

这无疑是一个极其不切现实的角色，他很难在一家勇于进取的现代企业里找到工作。但是，他制造的机器还在生产滑轮组，自它诞生以来已近 200 年了，还很漂亮。

在 1800 年前后工作的那些了不起的工程师不仅为英国工业的繁荣奠定了基础，还催生了现代技术世界。这些人中的大多数都是颇具品位的。但等到维多利亚女王继位之时，大众的品位无疑恶化了：到 1851 年，已达到空前低谷。然而，像普莱费尔勋爵（Lord Playfair）这样敏锐的观察者早在伦敦世博会期间就已指出，英国工业正在丧失它的推动力和创造力。虽然广泛和普遍的看法 —— 实际上被视为公理 —— 是，随工业主义而来的丑陋是规模化生产不可避免的后果，但我仍然怀疑该观点是否真经得起严格的历史检验。我认为更合理的假设是，优雅或多或少是和工商企业一道衰落的，这是因为在变革时代，从英国人的性格中浮现出某些相当低劣又得意忘形的东西。

19 世纪 70—80 年代的唯美主义运动强烈鞭挞了世间万物的丑陋，但收效甚微。我认为这不是因为这些人被歌剧《耐心》（Patience）里的吉尔伯特和苏立文及《猛击》杂志带偏了，而是因为它在很大程度上是一场逃避现实的运动，而且找错了靶子。这些圣母之子看不到，他们如此痛恨的一切无耻的丑恶，其根源不在机器本身，而在于思想方法。就像那些审美改革者一样，他们拒绝工程技术，而非投身其中。或许，如果他们已准备好学习工程技术，可能就会从体系内着手。但这是一个费力的科目，有太多艺术人士因莫名其妙的自卑而排斥它。当然，威廉·莫里斯（William Morris）及其追随者研究并实践了各种小规模的技术工艺；但是，真正缺少的是实实在在的规模化生产和一个高产社会的经济问题。

效率与功能主义

但是，当他的门徒看到时，却愤愤不平地说：「何必这样靡费？这种香膏本可以卖个好价钱来周济穷人。」

——《圣经·新约全书·马太福音》（Matthew 26:8-9）

虽然我们大义凛然地谴责现代工程师的平庸，但几乎所有工程师都固守着某些非常重要的价值观，它们在一个放任自流的时代既不时髦也不受欢迎。其中占主导地位的是客观性与责任感。工程师需要应付的不仅是人们及其一切怪癖和弱点，还有物理事实。一个人有时会与众人争论，且误导大众并非难事；但是，事实胜于雄辩。一个人不能威吓事实，不能贿赂事实，不能立法禁止事实，也不能假装另有真相或者事情从未发生。外行与政客可能会创造出他们幻想的东西，但对工程师来说，「他们关心的是齿轮啮合，是道岔锁闭器」。从本质上说，工程师制造的东西必须有用，而且一直有用，既安全又经济。工程师的工作或许是指出皇帝没有穿衣服，但不管这多么令人难堪，我们显然需要更多而非更少的实事求是的态度。

为追求他们职业的客观性，工程师发展出许多有助于实事求是的概念。其中一个便是「效率」，因此，弄明白随燃料进入发动机的昂贵的能量有多少可转化为有效动力，是非常有用的。这可以用一个简单的比率或百分比表示，它能告诉我们有关发动机做功方面的一个十分重要的事实。此外，比较各种不同结构的重量、成本和负载容量也是有价值的。如我们在第 14 章所见，有各种数值方法可以做到这一点。

但是，效率的概念如此有用，有时在经济上也非常具有影响力，以至于我们也可能被它带偏。如果我们试图将效率的观念应用于整体形势，那么我们通常是在假设有一种对所有事实皆了如指掌的智慧，而这对一个凡人来说是完全不可能的。我们可以根据燃料消耗量和动力输出来公正合理地评判一台发动机的效率，但如果我们只探讨「发动机的效率」（仅此而已），我们就是在自以为是。例如，我们没有考虑到发动机发出的噪声和气味，或者启动发动机的人是否可能心力衰竭，或者你能从发动机的外观获得多少愉悦感。

就算我们知道有关技术的一切事实（虽然不可能），我们也没法衡量或量化它们，因为其中有许多是不能测量的。不久前发生了一件大事，即关于在艾塞克斯海岸建一座大型机场的提议引起了广泛讨论。这个项目计划在泰晤士河口处潮湿的棱纹沙滩上堆放巨量的混凝土、厂房和机器，那里本是群鸥翔集聒噪之处。政客、行政官员、经济学家和工程师眼前满是需要建另一个机场的事实和数据，但是，以任何数值标准来权衡规划者和经济学家的主张、海鸥的权利及潮湿沙滩的美都是不可能的。我本人坚定地站在海鸥一边，一想起那绵延数里的潮湿沙滩，我就满心欢喜，虽然这是完全没有效益和产出的。迄今为止，海鸥和沙滩似乎仍是胜利的一方。

我认为一座机场的「效率」可以用它能应对多少架次的飞机和客流同其投资和运营成本之比来衡量，这些数据具有一定的实用价值，即便它们与这个世界上的所有海鸥和潮湿沙滩均无关。但在很多事情上，效率的概念实在是不合时宜，谈论一件家具或一座主教座堂的「效率」没有任何意义。尽管如此，工程师还是固守一个观念，即度量几乎所有东西的「效率」在某种意义上「应该」是可能的。但这完全是胡说八道。

「好吧，」工程师说道，「但事物必定是实用的，技术之美就在于它的功能主义。」如果他的意思是事物必须既能用又好用，那么他只是在陈述显而易见的事实。但是，当我们把功能主义用作一种审美标准时，我们就很容易陷入某种困境。桥梁等结构的功能既简单又明显，表现出来也确实如此。其中许多很漂亮，但有些则不然。还有一定数量的非常昂贵的人工制品的确外观好看，比如协和飞机与劳斯莱斯轿车。但是，我们是否确定，不计成本地追求工艺的完美就是正确的？在评估功能主义方面我们不应该考虑成本吗？

现在，一辆福特汽车的价格大约是一辆劳斯莱斯汽车的 1/10，在一切皆有价的现实世界中，许多人会认为福特汽车比劳斯莱斯汽车更「实用」。但是，福特汽车的外观与其机械加工的关系不大，我们见到的大概就是车身制造工和造型设计师安装在机器四周的一个锡盒。也就是说，任何现代规模化制造的汽车，其机械和功能部分都不会引人注目，它们主要是由小段管线和弯曲的金属制成的，不管它们多么有用，我们都很难驻足欣赏。

同理，无线电收发机等大多数电子设备在其管线裸露的状态下都是丑陋的，于是我们只好将它们藏在黑色、灰色或胡桃木色的盒子里。总体上，可以公正地说，随着现代技术的日益实用化，我们看到它们的机会越来越少。

但是，我们在大自然中找不到好的先例吗？一个人或一只动物的外在可能非常美丽，而内在却往往丑陋不堪。我们对大自然的欣赏是有高度选择性的。我们欣赏生长的某些阶段（羊羔而非胎儿），我们通常对腐朽和一切蠕虫感到恐惧。但是，腐朽与生长一样必要和实用。

关于功能主义和「效率」的问题，大自然似乎有一种幽默感，或者可能只是一种分寸感。例如，它构造植物的茎干时极其重视代谢的经济性，这是一个结构效率的奇迹。完成此事后，它会在顶部放一朵大花 —— 如人之所见，只是为了好玩。同样，雄孔雀有尾巴，女孩有长发，它们不能被严格地视为实用之物。如果某个无聊的家伙极力主张这些事物只是为了促进繁殖，那不过是让争论降了一级。这些装饰性特征为何有吸引力，是性还是其他方面的原因？

虽然对许多工程师来说，认为功能「效率」与外观之间存在紧密联系实际上是一个宗教信条，但我个人持怀疑态度。当然，完全无效的东西或者应该会有碍观瞻，但我怀疑技术性能的提升可能无法极大地改善外观。大多数情况正相反，榨取最后一点儿性能会产生乏味的外观，现代游艇便是一例。我本人坚信，一个人可从人工制品中获得的审美体验是创作者的个性与他所处时代的公认价值观的某种结合。如果你走在任何一条街上，睁大眼睛，开动脑筋，你就能靠这两种感知方式形成你自己的判断。

自文艺复兴以来，「科学」几乎攻击了每一个可以想到的阵地，但大多数攻击几乎都是毫无价值的。我总是觉得奇怪，真正反对科学的争论似乎少之又少，至少直接的争论不多。科学就是通过教我们以过度实用的理由做判断，从而潜移默化地扭曲了我们的价值体系。现代人会问「这个人或这个东西是干什么的」，而不会问「这个人或这个东西是什么」。这无疑是许多现代性疾病的根源。审美判断试图回答这个更宽泛也更重要的问题，虽然还算不上充分。在如今绝大多数情况下，我们的主观判断会与我们的科学（或实用）判断相冲突。但是，若我们无视审美判断，就要自担风险。

所有这些自然阻挡不了一个漂亮的物体同时也有用。我要说的重点是，这两种特征都是数学家所谓的「自变量」。这让我想起了爱尔兰游艇舵手的评价：「一艘丑陋的船比一个丑女人更不招人喜欢，不管它跑得有多快。」

形式主义与应力

现代的艺术和建筑大肆炫耀它们从传统的形式与惯例中解放出来，这可能也是它们取得的成就如此之少的原因。然而，在设计或方法上走形式不是一个障碍，这样的惯例既保护弱者又助力强者。所有最美观的船都是按传统风格设计的，我实在无法想象它们的设计者是受到了传统的束缚。希腊剧作家在一套严格规则的约束下写作，但是，认为《安提戈涅》受制于古典三一律，就像假设简·奥斯汀如果可以自由地使用粗鄙的语言和露骨的性描写就会创作出更伟大的作品一样，都荒谬至极。当然，为了领会形式的好处，我们有必要对这些规则做一定的了解。这同样适用于对主教座堂、桥梁和船舶的欣赏，就像观看板球赛一样。这为我们提供了一个很好的理由去了解一些工程学原理以及艺术和建筑的历史。

当伊克提鲁斯在公元前 446 年设计帕提侬神庙时，他采用了建筑学中久负盛誉的多立克柱式结构。帕提侬神庙，即处女神庙，无疑是世界上最美丽的建筑物之一，可能也是所有人工制品中最伟大的。虽然它是敬献给神圣的雅典娜的，但在我看来，它也是人文主义的至高体现，科学家汉弗莱·戴维将之誉为「关乎人力无限提升的精妙却虚妄的梦幻」。而且，它建造于雅典人权势与荣耀达到巅峰之时，彰显了这座处女城邦实乃「四海传丰裕，万国朝紫冠之雅典」。

当然，惩罚接踵而至，就像 1914 年的情况一样。当所有白色大理石、红色与蓝色涂料以及镀金青铜都是新的时候，帕提侬神庙可能只是一座有点儿庸俗的神庙，就像吉卜林笔下的那些。但是，伟大的艺术不总是有点儿庸俗吗？如果帕提侬神庙是一座人文主义的丰碑，那么一些早期的多立克柱式神庙，比如帕埃斯图姆的那些，在我看来则似乎表达了一种动人的宗教情怀。反之，我认为雅典的赫菲斯托斯神庙几乎没有传递什么东西，除了一丝商业主义气息，就像伯明翰市政厅那样。然而，所有这些不同的效果都产生于建筑师在单一死板语言中的工作。

就像所有伟大的艺术一样，帕提侬神庙也有多种诠释。但无可争辩的是其取得的重大成就。伊克提鲁斯是如何做到严格遵循传统风格展开工作的？自然只有一个人真正知道这个问题的答案，那就是伊克提鲁斯本人。他曾写作了一本书，可惜今天已失传。然而，我们还是可以做一些相当粗略的分析性观察。

在传统正规的蒸汽艇上，优雅与庄严产生于极尽精美、微妙与和谐的船体曲线和舷弧边线，也来源于桅杆、烟囱和甲板上层结构的精确和细心的安放（见插图 22）。船舶设计与诗歌创作的区别仅在于其中包含的数字。在多立克柱式建筑风格中亦如此，重要的是对细节的细心关注。虽然看起来是矩形的，但帕提侬神庙几乎没有一条直线，也没有几条线是真正平行的。其中 72 根圆柱相互倾斜，如果将它们延伸出去，就会在空中大约 5 英里处的一点交会。但我们的眼睛看到的却是一个简单的盒状结构，被精妙绝伦的设计欺骗和迷惑了。就像一个聪颖的女人，帕提侬神庙影响着我们，令我们着迷，虽然我们几乎觉察不到它是如何办到的，甚至根本意识不到它正在发生（见插图 23）。

但是，这一切与应力有什么关系？从某种意义上说，关系很大；而从另一种意义上说，关系又很小。早在 17 世纪费奈隆就观察到，古典建筑的影响力要归功于这样一个事实，即它看起来比实际更重，而哥特式建筑看起来则比实际更轻。在这个方面，厚道的功能主义似乎没有获得审美上的回报，因为它们看起来和实际一样重。

古典柱式，尤其是多立克柱式，在仅承担自重的情况下就已经显得摇摇欲坠了。大多数支柱上的载荷其实都非常小，但人为的膨胀或「凸肚」设计提供了一种泊松比效应，使我们确信它们在压应力的作用下会鼓胀。这种鼓胀效应通过膨胀的垫状柱头进一步传递，它将压缩载荷从门楣传递到柱头上。重量效应的进一步增强，靠的是柱顶过梁的极大深度。

虽然古典建筑以情感为基础，至少部分基于一种主观的压力感，但是其美丽与单驾马车意义上的现代结构效率的观念几乎完全无关。所有这些建筑物事实上都没什么效率。压应力低到离谱，而门楣上的拉应力又太高了，往往非常危险（第 9 章）。古典建筑物的屋顶，如我们所见，只能被描述为一种结构上的混乱。但是，这些建筑物中的大多数在审美方面都没什么问题。

当我们考虑哥特式建筑时，其砖石结构上的压应力照例要比古典建筑物高得多，而其结构作为一个整体通常会更稳定，尽管它有空灵的外观。然而，轻盈的效果部分是通过尖拱实现的，它们也是「低效的」。按照现代的实用思维，这些哥特式结构过于复杂了。哥特式主教座堂的真正英雄似乎是雕像，其重量落在尖顶和飞扶壁上，维持着推力作用线的稳定（第 9 章）。

古代建筑物可能在结构上是「低效的」，要想在审视结构时获取满足感，眼睛似乎需要某种主观的压力感。在许多现代建筑物中，用钢筋混凝土制成的承载结构通常是隐藏在建筑物内部的。外部观察者只能看到一堵薄砖或玻璃制的幕墙或「包覆」，显然根本无法承载任何载荷。我不认为只有我自己觉得这些建筑物看起来令人不满意，而且十分丑陋。

但是，假如我们有某种结构，其支承方法清晰可见，在现代意义上也高度「有效」，它会看起来像什么样子？显然，这是一个可以长期争论的话题。然而，如果我们可以根据用于登月的结构来判断（不计成本地节省重量，最终就像单驾马车那样），那么答案看起来很可能是「丑陋无比」。

拟形物、赝品与装饰物

希腊现存最早的重要建筑物属于迈锡尼时代，或许还可以追溯到公元前 1500 年之前。这些建筑物是用石块建造的，看起来经过慎重而精妙的设计，以便使结构与材料的特性相匹配。例如，迈锡尼人十分清楚石楣上拉应力过大的危险，他们也做了充分的准备工作来缓解石梁上的弯曲载荷，就像人们在迈锡尼城的狮门上看到的那样（见插图 24）。至少从这种意义上说，迈锡尼建筑可被描述为「在结构上具有实用性」。

当迈锡尼文明在公元前 1400 年左右瓦解时，希腊人似乎倒退回黑暗和蒙昧的时代，其间重要的建筑物无一幸免。毫无疑问，人们只能在这种或那种小木屋里生活和做礼拜。正规建筑的复兴始于古风时代早期，大概在公元前 800 年，早期的神庙是用木材建造的，就像新英格兰的那些教堂。

这些原始的木制神庙自然无法留存至今。然而，从木制结构过渡到石制结构似乎是一个断断续续的过程；随着木料日益短缺，腐烂的木制构件逐渐被石制构件替代。保萨尼阿斯提过一座神庙，直到 2 世纪仍矗立于奥林匹亚，其中留存着一些木制支柱，与更晚近的石柱混杂在一起。

因此，多立克柱式建筑属于「横梁式」或梁式建筑，以木制结构为基础；即便完全以石块重建神庙，建筑师仍坚守着适用于木料的形式与比例。5 世纪那些资深的古典建筑师不仅用脆弱的石梁代替木楣，还不厌其烦地用大理石复制各种无关紧要的结构细节，比如将木制建筑物用木栓接合在一起。

结果「应该」是荒谬的，但事实并非如此；这是一场辉煌的胜利，并成为文明世界的一个典范，断断续续存在了 2 000 年。这种类型的存续被称作「拟形物」，它们以这种或那种形式普遍存在于技术中。一个现代例证就是塑料模具和家具表面留存的木纹。

不同于工程美学思想的功能主义学派的整套伦理，拟形物未必是粗制滥造或粗俗的。当然，如今它们比比皆是，但这无疑是由于我们的错误实施，而不是因为这个观念本身有什么问题。

沃森蒸汽艇的开发是拟形物的一个绝妙的成功例证。这种大型蒸汽艇的经典样式是在稍晚的维多利亚时代演化出来的，出自一位最了不起的蒸汽艇设计者 —— 沃森（G. L. Watson，他的墓志铭为「正义归线条，公平归铅锤」）之手。在他的全动力船上，沃森不仅保留了帆船优美的「剪形」船首，还留下了现在无功能的船首斜桅。其结果是，沃森蒸汽艇成为有史以来最漂亮的船舶范例之一（见插图 22）。

若一切如此，那么我们如何看待设计中的「诚实」呢？诚实迫使我说「没什么」。如果拟形物在希腊神庙和蒸汽艇中是允许使用的，那么我们如何看待彻头彻尾的「赝品」呢？我们为什么不能把悬索桥装扮成中世纪的城堡，或让汽车看起来像驿站马车，或让紫杉树看起来像孔雀呢？

我个人相当赞成这样做。毕竟，其结果看起来不会比现代功能主义的结果更糟糕或更令人沮丧，而且它们可能更有趣。18 世纪的「哥特式」建筑有什么毛病？其中最佳者极其有趣而且十分美好。贺拉斯·沃玻尔绝非傻瓜，布莱顿的英皇阁也堪称佳作。