Oliver Wendell Holmes, The One-Hoss Shay

The entire physical world is most properly regarded as a great energy system: an enormous market-place in which one form of energy is for ever being traded for another form according to set rules and values. That which is energetically advantageous is that which will sooner or later happen. In one sense a structure is a device which exists in order to delay some event which is energetically favoured. It is energetically advantageous, for instance, for a weight to fall to the ground, for strain energy to be released -and so on. Sooner or later the weight will fall to the ground and the strain energy will be released; but it is the business of a structure to delay such events for a season, for a lifetime or for thousands of years. All structures will be broken or destroyed in the end -just as all people will die in the end. It is the purpose of medicine and engineering to postpone these occurrences for a decent interval.

The question is: what is to be regarded as a ‘decent interval'? Every structure must be built so as to be ‘safe' for what may reasonably be considered an appropriate working life. For a rocket case this might be a few minutes, for a car or an aircraft, ten or twenty years, for a cathedral perhaps a thousand years. Oliver Wendell Holmes's ‘one-hoss shay' was constructed to last for a hundred years – neither more nor less – and it disintegrated, exactly as planned, on 1 November 1855, just as tjhe parson had reached ‘fifthly' in the composition of his sermon. But, of course, this was nonsense. Again, the egregious but heroic Mr Honey in Nevil Shute's No Highway predicts the failure of the tail of the Reindeer airliner from ‘metal fatigue' after exactly 1,440 flying hours – plus or minus a day or so. This again was nonsense, as Nevil Shiite must have known, being an experienced aircraft designer.

It is impossible, in practice, to plan for a ‘safe' life of exactly so many hours or years. We can only consider the problem in statistical terms and in the light of accumulated data and experience. We then build in whatever margin of safety seems reasonable. All the time Ave are working on a basis of probabilities and estimates. If we make the structure too weak we may save weight and money, but then the chance of the thing breaking too soon will become unacceptably high. Contrariwise, if we make a structure so strong that, in human terms, it is likely to last ‘for ever' – which is what the public would like – then it will probably be too heavy and expensive. As we shall see, there are many cases where more danger is incurred by extra weight than is avoided by the corresponding increase of strength. Because we are necessarily working on a statistical basis, when we design a practical structure for a realistic life we have to accept that there is always some finite risk, however small, of premature failure.

As Sir Alfred Pugsley points out in his book The Safety of Structures,* it is just at this rather interesting stage that we may have to abandon a strictly logical approach to the problem. As Pugsley says, the human emotions are quite exceptionally sensitive to the fear of structural failure, and the layman clings with great tenacity to the idea that any structure or device with which he is personally associated should be ‘unbreakable'. This crops up in all sorts of connections; sometimes it does no harm, sometimes the effect is counter-productive. During the last war aircraft designers had the choice, to some extent, of trading off structural safety against other qualities in the aircraft. Now the losses of bomber aircraft by enemy action were very high, something like one out of twenty in each sortie.† Against this, the losses from structural failures were very few, much less than one aircraft in ten thousand. The structure of an aeroplane accounts for practically a third of its total weight, and it would have been rational to have slimmed the structural parts of the bombers in return for other advantages.

If this had been done there would have been some small increase in the structural accident rate, but the weight that would have been saved could have been invested in more defensive guns or in thicker protective armour. In that case there would no doubt have been a significant reduction in the net, or overall, casualty rate. But the airmen would not hear of anything of the kind. They preferred the big risk of being shot down by the enemy to the smaller risk of the aircraft breaking up in the air for structural reasons.

Pugsley suggests that the feeling that it is in some way outrageous for a structure to break may be inherited from our arboreal ancestors, who were frightened, above all things, that the trees in which they lived might break beneath them – when down would come baby and cradle and all. And besides, the ancestors and their babies would fall into the mouths of their enemies on the ground, such as sabre-toothed tigers or whatnot. Whether this is the real reason or no, engineers have to take these sort of feelings into account, even though the extra weight incurred may involve dangers of its own.

The accuracy of strength calculations

It is implicit in any rational approach to questions of strength and safety that the engineer should be able to predict, with sufficient accuracy, the strength of a proposed structure when it is new -even if he is in doubt about how long it may be expected to last. While this may be roughly the case for simple structures such as ropes and chains and straightforward beams and columns, as we saw in Chapter 4, it is just not true at all for the more elaborate and critical artefacts, things like aircraft and ships.

Since there is available a great body of accumulated experience with various kinds of structures, since there also exists a vast and highly mathematical literature on the subject, and since academic elasticians, in their pride, deliver endless lectures about the theory of structures, that statement might be regarded as sticking one's neck out. However, it is true.

Consider, for instance, the statistics for the strength of aircraft. Since the saving of weight is important and since the consequences of failure are very horrible, a great deal of care and thought is naturally given to the structural design of aeroplanes, and every detail is meticulously checked. The drawings and calculations are made by highly skilled designers and stressmen and draughtsmen, using the most scientific methods. When these people have done their sums the strength calculations are checked, quite independently, by an entirely different set of experts. Thus the strength predictions which are finally arrived at are about as accurate and painstaking as is humanly possible. Finally, and to make quite certain, an actual full-scale airframe is tested to destruction.

It is not possible to give really up-to-date results because so few different types of aeroplane have been ordered in recent years that the figures are not statistically significant. However, when aircraft were simpler and cheaper, a comparatively large number of designs reached at least the prototype stage. Between 1935 and 1955 something in the region of a hundred different kinds of aeroplane were built and tested to destruction in this country. Thus the results for this period form a fairly reliable guide with some sort of statistical basis.

Naturally, the actual figures of the required strengths for these different aircraft varied a great deal, according to the size and type of aeroplane. However, each design team could be said to be aiming at that strength which is known in the jargon of the aircraft trade as ‘120 per cent fully factored load'.* If structural design were anything like an exact profession one would expect the various test results, when plotted on a curve or ‘histogram', to cluster pretty closely around the value for 120 per cent fully factored load, give or take a very little. In other words the results should produce a narrow ‘normal' or bell-shaped distribution curve, much like Figure 1.

As is fairly well known, nothing of the sort happened. When the results are plotted the histogram looks more like Figure 2. The experimental strengths tend to be randomly distributed between about 50 per cent and 150 per cent of the required or fully factored load. That is to say, even the most eminent designers cannot be relied upon to predict the strength of an aeroplane within a range of three to one. Some of these aircraft were less than half as strong as they should have been; others were much too strong and therefore considerably heavier than they needed to be.

Figure 1. Expected statistical distribution of experimental aircraft strengths (schematic diagram).

Figure 2. Actual distribution of strengths of airframes broken in test-frame, 193S-5S (very approximate schematic diagram).

When it comes to ships, there are really no data on which one can base this sort of judgement – for the reason that ships are almost never tested to destruction under laboratory conditions. It is therefore impossible to tell how good or bad naval architects are at their job – at least as far as strength predictions are concerned. However, as we said in Chapter 5, the number of structural accidents to ships is considerable, and it seems very possible that the number of accidents per ton-mile is increasing at the present time.

With regard to bridges, the problem of strength calculation is in some respects easier than with ships and aircraft, since the loading conditions are less varied. Nevertheless, the number of failures in modem bridges is quite significant.

Designing by experiment

Now, in building of chaises, I tell you what,

There is always somewhere a weakest spot -

In hub, tire, felloe, or spring or thill,

In panel, or crossbar, or floor, or sill,

In screw, bolt, thoroughbrace – lurking still,

Find it somewhere you must and will.

Oliver Wendell Holmes, The One-Hoss Shay

The fallibility of the theoretical design process is, of course, the reason for the insistence on the experimental strength testing of all aircraft. However, the benefits of an experimental approach extend still further. We have assumed that it ought to be the designer's aim for a structure to fail, the first time it is tested, exactly at the required load. But even the most scientifically designed structure is very unlikely to be of consistent strength throughout all its parts – like the legendary shay, where and so on for many components and many lines of verse.

...the wheels were Just as strong as the thills,

And the floor was just as strong as the sills,

And the panels were just as strong as the floor -

On the test-frame the structure breaks at the weakest place; all the rest of the structure is therefore of greater strength. If an air-frame fails initially at just the required 120 per cent it follows that much the greater part of the structure is too strong for its purpose, and this extra strength is completely wasted. But we have no means of knowing where and how to lighten the structure. Repeated tests on large structures are expensive and time-consuming, but, where time and money allow, it is better to arrange, if possible, for the initial failure to occur at a load comfortably below the official 120 per cent. The weak place thus indicated can then be strengthened and the whole structure retested – and so on.

The war-time Mosquito bomber, which was one of the most successful aircraft in history, failed initially at 88 per cent of the factored load – in the rear wing-spar. The aeroplane was then progressively strengthened up to a figure of 118 per cent. It was owing, partly, to the exceptionally light and strong airframe that the performance of this aircraft was outstanding.

This is, roughly speaking, the Darwinian method, which Nature seems to rely on to develop her own structures – though she seems to be in less of a hurry and less mindful of the value of life than are most civilized human engineers. It is also, to a notable extent, the method employed by the makers of cars and other cheap, mass-produced goods. These people tend to make their products deliberately too weak for their purpose and to rely upon customers' complaints to detect the significant faults.

Thus a great deal of the strength-predicting element of design boils down to a sort of game in which we try to spot the weakest link in a load-bearing system. The more complicated the structure, the more difficult and unreliable this becomes. Fortunately, the design of a great many structures, from furniture and buildings to aeroplanes, is rescued from becoming a completely ridiculous process by the fact that the stiffness requirements may be more exacting than the strength requirements. Thus, if the structure is made stiff enough for its purpose, it may then very well be sufficiently strong. Since the deflections in a structure depend upon its general character rather than upon the existence of a ‘weakest link', stiffness predictions are much easier to make, and more reliable, than strength predictions. This is what we really mean when we talk about designing a thing ‘by eye'.

How long will it last?

This also said Phocylides:

A tiny rock-built citadel

Is finer far, if ordered well,

Than all your frantic Ninevehs.

Phocylides (translated by Sir Maurice Bowra)

In discussing the strength and stability of the masonry cathedrals Professor Jacques Heyman has laid down the principle that ‘If a structure will stand for five minutes, it will stand for five hundred years.' For masonry structures built upon rock this is, broadly speaking, true. However, many cathedrals and other buildings have been founded upon soft ground. If this soft soil creeps (Chapter 7) – which happens quite often – curious things will happen, such as the Leaning Tower of Pisa. Such movements take time and can often be predicted, but they are very expensive to put right, and a certain number of buildings, both ancient and modern, fall down or have to be demolished for this reason.

In most types of structure, rot and rust are very active agents of decay. It is partly the fear of rot which has turned engineers and architects in Britain against timber. However, the poor benighted foreigners in America and Canada and Scandinavia and Switzerland, who build between them about 1,500,000 wooden houses each year, do not seem to be troubled with rot to the same extent, and it might be a good idea to see how they manage these things. The use of wood is greatly on the increase in these countries.

Timbers vary a great deal in their natural resistance to decay, and Lloyd's Register allocates a fixed number of years of life to each of the different timbers which are used in shipbuilding. However, with modern knowledge and methods of treatment, it should be possible to get a practically indefinite life from almost any kind of wood.

Most metals corrode in service. Modern mild steel rusts very much worse than Victorian wrought iron or cast iron, and so rust is, to some extent, a modern problem. Because the cost of labour is high, the cost of the painting and maintenance of steelwork is high. This is one good reason for using reinforced concrete, since steel embedded in concrete does not rust. In fact large modern ships, such as tankers, are constructed for a life of about fifteen years; on the whole it is cheaper to scrap than to paint. The life of cars is even shorter, usually for the same reason. It is true that for some structures one could use stainless steel but it is by no means always proof against corrosion, and stainless steels are expensive and awkward to fabricate. Besides this, the ‘ fatigue properties' of stainless steels are usually bad.

These are some of the reasons for choosing aluminium alloys; but, apart from the extra cost, there are a number of cases where the stiffness of aluminium has proved inadequate. The difficulty of welding aluminium is also a handicap. Some Communist countries see a great future for aluminium and have invested largely in aluminium plants. The London stock-markets were considerably shaken by the Tube Investments-British Aluminium take-over bid in 1961. However, the market for aluminium has not expanded to anything like the extent which was anticipated by the businessmen concerned in this transaction. In any case it requires more energy to make aluminium than to make steel.

Even if the material of a structure does not deteriorate, its life may be subject to statistical effects which are sometimes calculable – and sometimes not. Many structures are likely to be broken only in rather exceptional circumstances, and it may be a long time before these circumstances arise. Freakishly high waves, in the case of a ship, and exceptionally severe upward gusts with aircraft are cases in point. Some structures are likely to be broken only by unusual combinations of events. For a bridge this might be the coincidence of very high winds with exceptional traffic loads. Although such eventualities ought to be provided for, it may be many years before they actually happen. So an essentially unsafe structure may stand for a long time, simply because it has never been fully tried.

Responsible engineers do, of course, try to predict things of this sort and to make structural provision for them, but in many cases such peak loads shade off into what the insurance companies call ‘acts of God'.* If a ship runs into a large bridge, destroying both the bridge and the ship, as happened recently in Tasmania, it is very difficult to see what either the naval architect or the bridge designer could have been expected to do about it from the structural point of view. The problem is one not for the structural engineer but for the local Pilotage Association. Again, aircraft cannot be designed to be flown into mountains. We do, to a certain extent, design cars to be driven into brick walls without killing the passengers, but then we do not expect the car to be of much use afterwards.

Metal fatigue, Mr Honey and all that

One of the most insidious causes of loss of strength in a structure is ‘fatigue': that is to say, the cumulative effect of fluctuating loads. The dramatic possibilities of fatigue in metals were first exploited in popular literature in 1895 in Kipling's account of what happened when the propellor of the Grotkau dropped off somewhere in the Bay of Biscay because of a fatigue crack in the tailshaft.† Kipling went out of fashion, but public interest in fatigue was revived in 1948 by Nevil Shute's No Highway. The success of this story, both as a book and as a film, was no doubt partly due to the character of Mr Honey, the archetypal boffin, but perhaps still more to the three Comet disasters, which occurred not very long afterwards. As Whistler remarked some time ago, Nature keeps creeping up on Art. The circumstances of the Comet accidents were not very different from those imagined in No Highway, except that many more lives were lost and a great deal of damage was done to the British aircraft industry.

As a matter of fact, engineers* knowledge of fatigue effects in metals goes back rather over a hundred years. Indeed it was not long after the Industrial Revolution that it began to be noticed that the moving parts of machinery would sometimes break at loads and stresses which would have been perfectly safe in a stationary component. This was especially dangerous in railway trains, whose axles would sometimes break off suddenly and for no apparent reason after they had been in service for a time. The effect soon came to be known as ‘fatigue', and the classical researches on the subject were carried out during the middle years of the nineteenth century by a German railway official called Wöhler (1819-1914). From his photograph Herr Wöhler looks exactly what one would expect a German nineteenth-century railway official to look like; but he did a very useful job.

As we said in Chapter 5, even though there may be a high local stress at the tip of a notch or a crack, the crack will not extend – so long as it is shorter than the ‘critical Griffith length' – because making it spread requires work to be done against the ‘work of fracture' of the material. However, when the stress in the material is a fluctuating one, slow changes take place within the crystalline structure of the metal, and this is particularly likely to happen in the region of a stress concentration. These changes have the effect of reducing the work of fracture of the metal in such a manner that the crack is able to extend, very slowly, even though it may be much shorter than the ‘critical length'.

In this way a tiny unseen crack may start from any hole or notch or irregularity in a stressed metal and may spread across the material, which is not, as a whole, changed in any obvious way. Sooner or later, such a ‘fatigue crack' will reach the critical length for an ordinary common or garden crack. When this happens, the crack will immediately speed up and run right across the material, often with very serious consequences. It is usually quite easy to diagnose a fatigue crack after failure because of its characteristic striped or banded appearance. Before rupture, however, an incipient fatigue failure may be practically impossible to spot.

Naturally metallurgists and others do a great deal of experimental fatigue testing on their materials, and a great many different types of testing machine are now available for the purpose. It is common to consider the fatigue properties of a metal in terms of a reversed stress (±s) – that is to say, the sort of stress which would occur in a rotating cantilever, such as the axle of a vehicle. (There are ways of converting these results to other conditions of fluctuating stress.) This reversed stress (±s) is usually plotted on a graph against the logarithm of the number (n) of times the stress has to be applied to a specimen to cause failure. This is sometimes called an ‘s-n diagram'.

The s-n diagram for a typical steel would look like Figure 3. It will be seen that the ‘curve' is a dog-legged affair which flattens off after about a million reversals – which might be equivalent to about 3,000 miles of service for the axle of a car or train, or about ten hours of running for an ordinary car engine, which, of course, goes round much faster than the wheels. The existence of a definite ‘fatigue limit' of this nature for materials like iron and steel constitutes a great comfort to the engineer. If his engine or his vehicle will run for 106 or 107 revolutions – which may only take a few hours – then there is some hope of its being safe indefinitely. But fatigue is a danger which always needs to be considered.

Figure 3. Typical fatigue curve for iron or steel.

Aluminium alloys do not have a definite fatigue limit but tend to tail off, something after the fashion of Figure 4. This makes them more dangerous to use and accounts for some apparently old-fashioned prejudices in favour of steel for use in machinery and other structures.

The Comet accidents, which occurred in 1953 and 1954, naturally caused consternation and well-justified alarm. The investigation of these accidents by Sir Arnold Hall and a large team of experts was a classical feat, not only of engineering detection, but also of deep-sea salvage. The broken parts of one of the aircraft, which had fallen into the Mediterranean, had to be dredged up from a depth of over 300 feet or 50 fathoms. The salvage people managed to recover practically the whole of the aeroplane and the innumerable fragments covered the floor of a large hangar at Farnborough. As far as I remember, no piece was more than two or three feet across.

Figure 4. Non-ferrous alloys such as brass and aluminium frequently do not show any definite fatigue limit.

The Comet was one of the earliest airliners to have a pressurized fuselage. The main purpose of this was, of course, to spare the passengers from the discomfort and danger of the atmospheric pressure changes associated with change of altitude. In the old days, when flying over the Rocky Mountains, one used to have to eat one's lunch while wearing an oxygen mask: this now ranks as one of those lost skills. In a pressurized aircraft the fuselage becomes, in effect, a cylindrical pressure vessel, not unlike a very thin-walled boiler, which is pressurized and relaxed every time the aircraft climbs and descends.

The lethal mistake in the design of the Comet lay in not realizing sufficiently the danger of ‘fatigue' occurring at stress concentrations in the metal of the fuselage under these circumstances. The Comet was built from aluminium alloys, and most of de Havilland's previous experience had been gained with wooden aeroplanes, such as the triumphantly successful Mosquito. I am not suggesting for a moment that de Havilland's very able design staff did not know a lot about fatigue; but it is possible that the danger of fatigue in aluminium alloys may not have burnt itself sufficiently deeply into their collective consciousness. Wood is much less susceptible to this danger than metals – which is one of its great advantages.

In each of these accidents cracks,seem to have started from the same small hole in the fuselage and spread, slowly and undetected, until they reached the ‘critical Griffith length'. Whereupon the skin tore catastrophically and the fuselage exploded like a blown-up balloon. By repeatedly pressurizing a Comet fuselage in a large tank of water at Farnborough, Sir Arnold Hall was able to reproduce the effect so that it could be observed, as it were, in slow motion.

Part of the trouble about the Comet accidents was that the fatigue cracks which must have existed were never spotted by an inspector, perhaps because he was not expecting to find them, but more probably because they were too short to be seen easily. Nowadays aircraft fuselages are designed to contain with safety cracks up to about two feet long, and one would think that so long a crack could hardly fail to be seen in good time. There is, however, the story about the two cleaners at London Airport. These ladies finished sweeping out the cabins of an empty airliner late one night. They shut the door and went down the steps on to the tarmac.

‘You've forgotten to switch off the light in the toilet, Mary.'

‘ How do you know?'

‘Can't you see it shining through the crack in the fuselage?'

Accidents to wooden ships

Before the days of railways nearly all the heavy traffic went by water. Besides the deep sea trade and the Continental trade and the inland trade by river and canal, there was an even larger coastal trade. Many thousands of little wooden brigs and schooners, of the kind caricatured by W. W. Jacobs, transported anything and everything, not only into the coastwise creeks and harbours, but to almost every possible or impossible beach. A ship would be grounded on the beach at high water and, when the tide fell, would unload her coal or bricks or lime or household furniture into carts which were driven alongside. When the tide rose again, she would slip away to sea and then go and do it all over again somewhere else.

Naturally this was rather a risky business, but during the eighteenth century most of the smaller vessels could afford to lay up and refit during the worst of the winter – when the crews could see something of their families and of the local pubs. This slightly idyllic and not exceptionally dangerous state of affairs was upset by the more competitive conditions of the nineteenth century. Under commercial pressures vessels had to trade throughout the winter and could not afford, as a rule, to wait for weather. Indeed the regularity of some of these little sailing ships would put a lot of modern goods trains to shame.

But, of course, a price had to be paid. During the middle 1830s an average of 567 shipwrecks occurred round the coasts of this country each year; as a result, a yearly average of 894 lives were lost. Whether these figures are better or worse, per ton-mile of goods delivered, than modern lorries I do not know. At any rate the public conscience was disturbed at the time and Parliament appointed a Select Committee to investigate the ‘Causes of Shipwrecks'. After hearing a great deal of evidence, the committee reported that, apart from minor causes, shipwrecks in this country could principally be attributed to the following conditions in ships:

Defective construction.

Inadequacy of equipment.

Imperfect state of repair.

They pronounced' That the defective construction of ships appears to have been greatly encouraged by the system of classification [i.e. the rules governing construction and repair of insured ships] which, from the year 1798 up to 1834, was followed by Lloyds.'

The committee went on to add that the system by which the government measured ships for tonnage dues encouraged thoroughly unseaworthy shapes of hull. The bureaucratic mind does not seem to change very greatly through the centuries.

To be fair, the problem of framing regulations for the strength and safety of ships, or any other kind of structure, is an extraordinarily difficult one. No doubt a certain amount of progress has been made in the matter since the 1830s. At the same time, and in a different sense, a great deal of technical progress has been prevented – especially by the various building regulations. As Pugsley points out in The Safety of Structures, it is inherently impossible to make regulations about the strength of structures which are proof against both fools and knaves without preventing, or at best handicapping, development and innovation. Regulations for structural safety are presumably necessary, but some of them are not only stultifying; they can be the actual cause of accidents.

To return to wooden ships: not only the clippers but the little brigs and brigantines and topsail schooners and barges – which were so beautiful and so satisfying – have all gone, and the yards that used to build them are now turning out yachts. The structural problem of a wooden yacht is both more and also less severe than that of larger vessels. Yachts' hulls are not bumped on shingle beaches while carrying cargoes of stone or coal, but they have a more difficult problem with regard to local impacts which their thin skins are not well fitted to resist.

Now that long voyages in small yachts have become so fashionable this question of the impact strength of the hull has become important. Yachts voyaging in deep waters have repeatedly been attacked and sunk by killer whales. These animals weigh about six tons and swim at around thirty knots. They seem to have a special hatred for small yachts, which they ram and hole below the waterline. This has now happened so often that the possibility cannot any longer be classed as an ‘act of God' (Poseidon presumably) but is a serious hazard which must be guarded against.

It is probably impracticable to make the sides of a small yacht thick enough and strong enough to resist such an attack. The best thing to do would seem to be to provide some sort of inflatable floatation gear to keep the yacht afloat – and preferably sailable – after she has been holed. So far, those who have survived these attacks have done so by taking to the dinghy, which, naturally, gave most of them a very unpleasant time before they were picked up by a steamer after many days or weeks.

More about boilers and pressure vessels – and something with boiling oil in it

For a considerable number of years before the railway system was completed much of the passenger and express freight traffic was carried by steamship. During the first half of the nineteenth century, not only were there far more steamers running to more Continental ports than is the case today, but there were also very numerous services between towns in Great Britain. Considerably the cheapest – and often the quickest and most comfortable -route from London to such places as Newcastle, Edinburgh or Aberdeen was by steamboat.

Accidents were fewer in steamships than in sailing vessels only because there were many fewer steamships. Nevertheless, between 1817 and 1839, there were ninety-two major accidents to steamships in British waters. Of these, twenty-three were due to boiler explosions. This is nothing like as bad a record as that of the American river steamers a few years later; but it is quite bad enough.

Some of the early boilers were made from unsuitable materials, such as cast iron. At least one cast-iron boiler, that of the S.S. Norwich, duly burst and killed several people. Even when boilers were more or less properly constructed from wrought iron, they were very commonly neglected and allowed to rust through until they burst. This was the cause of the loss of the For farshire on the Fame Islands in 1838. Five people were rescued by Grace Darling's superb feat of seamanship.*

Again a Parliamentary Committee was appointed, which reported in 1839 and produced an extensive, thorough, factual and almost incredible document. During the boom years of the expansion of the steam engine, sober, let alone competent, responsible or intelligent engine-room staff were almost unobtainable, even at very high wages. These people treated their engines and boilers with a degree of ignorance and carelessness which almost passes belief. For instance:

A steamer, on her passage from Ireland to Scotland, was perceived by her commander during the night, and in a smooth sea, to be going with much greater than ordinary velocity through the water. The engineer was not at his post; the Captain inquired of the fireman how it was that the engines were going so fast: the man said ‘He could not tell, for he had very little steam and had been firing hard nevertheless'. The Captain began to look about him and, approaching the chimney where the exposed safety valves were fixed, he perceived a passenger fast asleep with the greater part of the weight of his body resting on the flat, cheese shaped, weights of the safety valve. This man had contrived, with some luggage, to make his bed there for warmth. On arousing and turning him off, the valve rose, the steam escaped with a roar which denoted its having attained a very elevated pressure.

There was no mercurial gauge to indicate the pressure of the steam to the fireman who was accustomed to keep it as near as he could to the blowing-off point: and not having heard it escape, he ‘fired-up* believing his steam to be low; and he was too ignorant to ascertain the fact, though the increased speed of the engines should have informed him that something unusual had occurred.

It is mentioned by several of our correspondents that engine men, firemen and even masters have frequently been caught sitting, or even standing, on the safety valves, or hanging weights and resting their bodies on the levers in order to raise the pressure of the steam at the moment of starting.

The report goes on to say that it was also the practice to stow surplus bunker coal on top of the safety valve. The steamship Hercules blew up from this cause. Altogether, it is rather remarkable that only seventy-seven lives were lost from boiler explosions in British steamers during the period under review.

The record of the railways was about as bad as that of the steamships and for much the same causes. There was a succession of very serious accidents extending over a period of seventy or eighty years. About the last of these occurred in 1909. A locomotive boiler blew up although the pressure gauge appeared to be showing zero pressure. It turned out that a workman had assembled the safety valve the wrong way round, so that it was incapable of blowing off at all. The gauge appeared to show no pressure for the simple reason that the needle had gone right round its full travel and was pressing against the wrong side of the stop pin. Three people were killed and three more badly injured.

In these latter days the number of boiler explosions has greatly diminished. This is partly because the manufacture and maintenance of steam boilers is now closely controlled by law and by the insurance companies, but perhaps more because the number of steam engines in service is now quite small and those that do exist are nearly all large plants, such as power stations, which are presumably run by competent people.

But – when is a boiler not a boiler? This is quite an interesting legal question. There exist in industry a large number of pressure vessels of one kind or another which are used in various manufacturing processes. Many of these vessels are of more complicated and less conventional design than traditional boilers and they may be less obviously dangerous. In general the control over their manufacture and use is less strict than for ordinary boilers. However, many of these vessels are heated by process steam or by hot oil under pressure, so that the consequences of fracture may be nearly as bad. It is well to bear in mind that the fatigue limit for the weld metal in mild steel structures exposed to wet steam may be as low as ±2,000 p.s.L

In one instance in which I was concerned, two large rotating drums, used for making plastic-coated paper, had been converted from low-pressure oil heating to steam heating – using process steam at a higher pressure. To make certain, the insurance company's inspector had insisted that the drums be ‘strengthened' internally by connecting the flat end-plates to the cylindrical surface by means of a number of large triangular gussets, or brackets, cut from mild steel plate and welded in place.

Both drums burst in service after being used for a short time with steam heating. From the drawings I calculated that, in the two drums, there were forty-eight individual places at which failure should have taken place. In fact this was a pessimistic estimate; failure actually occurred at only forty-seven places. By the grace of God, nobody was killed or seriously injured: but it was naughty of the insurance company's inspector, who, I expect, was a diligent and well-meaning little man.

Another case was more tragic. A firm of chemical engineering contractors had bought in from elsewhere a mixing vessel which they installed as part of a plant they were constructing for a customer. Since this mixing vessel was intended to be heated by oil under pressure, the pressurized heating jacket had been subjected to a ‘proof test' with cold water. It had withstood a pressure of 65 p.s.i. without obvious damage before it was installed. However, when the plant was commissioned and the jacket was filled with very hot oil at only about 23 p.s.i., the jacket burst after a few hours of service, spraying a man with oil at 280° C, from the effects of which he died a few days afterwards.

According to the report of the official inspector, the accident could only have happened as a consequence of gross mismanagement by my clients, the firm of chemical engineers. As a result these people had become involved in very elaborate and expensive litigation in the High Court.

In fact the official report of the accident was based on faulty observation of the broken remains and was quite misleading. The vessel had burst, not because it was mishandled by my clients, but because it was of incompetent design and manufacture. Although the technical cause of the accident was, in reality, of a slightly subtle nature, both my clients and also the people who actually made the vessel had assumed the design of such a thing to be a trivial problem. In fact the vessel was never really ‘designed' at all in any sophisticated sense but was simply put together ‘ by eye' in a back-street welding shop.

What actually happened was that, during the ‘proof loading' the vital welds which held the pressurized heating jacket together were considerably distorted – although nobody noticed it at the time. In reality these welds were so near to failure that a few reversals of stress, resulting from a much lower pressure in the jacket, sufficed to cause a fatigue failure, with disastrous consequences. This possibility should have been spotted by a competent trained engineer. In law, and perhaps in equity, the major blame lay with the people who had made the vessel; but I cannot help thinking that the danger should have been foreseen by a competent firm of chemical engineers. When I went to see these people the managing director took me out to lunch. By way of making conversation I said' How many graduate engineers do you have in your organization, Mr—V

‘None, thank God!'

On cutting holes in things

Although it is generally rash to cut holes in an existing structure some people seem unable to resist the temptation to do so. A case in point occurred with the Master aircraft. This aeroplane was built as an advanced trainer for the R.A.F. just before the war. It had some of the performance, and many of the handling qualities, of the Hurricane and the Spitfire. In the emergency of 1940 some of the Masters were converted into operational fighters by installing six machine guns in the wings. The original trainer version of the machine had wire-operated control surfaces which, though they were perfectly satisfactory, gave a slightly ‘softer' response than those of a real fighter. Somebody therefore decided to change over from wire to rod control linkages in the fighter version of the Master. To make room for the rods which operated the rudder and elevator, suitable slots were cut in the rear bulkhead of the fuselage.

Before long we were faced with a series of three fatal accidents. In each case the tail had come off in flight. When we got the fuselage on the test-frame we found that its strength had been reduced to only 45 per cent of the fully factored load. The moral is, I suppose, to leave well alone.

A much better-known accident of this type, in which a great many lives were lost, occurred with the troopship Birkenhead. This iron steamship had started life as a warship in 1846 with adequate strength and well supplied with continuous water-tight bulkheads. When she was converted into a troopship, however, the War Office insisted that very large openings should be cut in the transverse water-tight bulkheads* so as to give more light and air and more apparent space for the troops.

In 1852 the Birkenhead was dispatched to India, by way of the Cape, with 648 persons on board, including twenty women and children. By an error of pilotage, the ship struck an isolated rock about four miles off the South African coast. The vessel was badly holed forward, and, since the bulkheads had been cut away, all the troop-decks in the forward part of the ship were flooded so quickly that many of the troops were drowned as they lay in their hammocks (the time being 2 a.m.).

Under the weight of the incoming water the flooded fore-part of the ship broke off and sank almost immediately, leaving the survivors crowded into the after-part, which sank more slowly. It was dark, the sea was full of sharks and the life-boats were inadequate. The troops behaved with great courage and discipline, smartly fallen-in on the after-deck, while the women and children were sent ashore in such boats as there were. All of the women and children were saved but only 173 men survived: the rest were drowned or eaten by sharks.

The most obvious effect of cutting holes in the bulkheads was, of course, that the various compartments in the ship flooded very rapidly, and this was undoubtedly the prime cause of the ship's loss. Fewer lives might have been lost, however, if the ship had not broken in two, and this must be attributed, at least in part, to the weakening of the hull as a whole by cutting away the bulkheads on which its strength depended.

The loss of the Birkenhead immediately became famous as an example of discipline and heroism – and deservedly so. When the news reached Berlin, the King of Prussia ordered the story to be read aloud to all the units of his army, specially paraded for the purpose. But perhaps it would have been better still if he had instructed his War Office not to interfere with the structure of ships, a matter which soldiers do not always understand.

According to Mr K. C. Barnaby, a distinguished naval architect, the idea that open space was more important than safety in troopships lasted for many years. He says that, as late as 1882, shipowners were complaining that, when they fitted additional bulkheads as urged by the Admiralty, the trooping authorities would not accept the ships on the ground that the spaces between the bulkheads were too small.*

On being overweight

Almost every structure has a tendency to turn out heavier than its designer intended. This is partly due to over-optimistic estimating in the weights office, but it is also due to a tendency on the part of almost everybody to ‘play safe' by making each part just that much thicker and heavier than is really necessary. In many people's eyes this is a sort of virtue – a sign of honesty and integrity – and we talk of things being ‘heavily built' as a term of praise, while ‘lightly built' is almost synonymous with ‘flimsy' or'shoddy'.

Sometimes this does not matter, but there are cases where it matters very much indeed. With aircraft the weight is tending to increase all the time, from the drawing-board onwards. Extra weight naturally restricts the fuel capacity or the payload of the aeroplane, but, besides this increase in gross weight, the centre of gravity of an aeroplane somehow always manages to work its way too far aft. In other words the weight of the tail tends to increase out of proportion to that of the rest of the machine. This can be a serjous matter. If the C.G. gets too far aft, the aircraft will acquire dangerous flying characteristics. It may have a tendency to go into a spin from which it is unable to recover. For this reason a surprising number of aircraft – including some very famous ones – have gone around all their lives carrying massive lead weights permanently bolted into their noses; this is necessary in order to keep the C.G. in a tolerably safe position. It need hardly be said that this is a bad thing.

The effects of overweight are just as bad, perhaps worse, with ships. Not only do all ship hulls tend to be overweight absolutely, but the C.G. tends, in this case, to creep, not backwards but upwards – ineluctably upwards. Now the stability of a ship, that is, her tendency to float right-side up, instead of upside-down or on her side, depends upon something called her ‘metacentric height'. This is the vertical distance between a mystic but important point called the ‘metacentre' and her centre of gravity. For excellent reasons the metacentric height of even a large ship is likely to be quite a small distance – in fact in the region of one or two feet, perhaps less. Thus the position of the C.G. has only to rise by a matter of a few inches to reduce the metacentric height by a very significant fraction which may well imperil the safety of the ship. Various ships have capsized on launching for this reason, and no doubt the yard foremen, or whoever were responsible for the extra top-weight, considered that they were in no way to blame.

We mentioned the loss of H.M.S. Captain in Chapter 11. The whole story of the Captain was intensely political and controversial at the time; I suppose few accidents can have had such far-reaching historical consequences. The Captain represented one turning point in the evolution of the steam battleship and perhaps in the modern concept of world power. The Admiralty have often been criticized by historians who know very little about ships for their slowness in changing from sail to steam. These are sometimes just the historians who are most critical of ‘imperialist expansion' and so forth.

It has to be borne in mind that, until comparatively recently, the unreliable engines, the high coal consumption and the short range of steam warships made them dependent upon bases and coaling stations and ‘colonies' as soon as they ventured beyond home waters. The exercise of world power by steam navies is a very different sort of thing from the strategy and logistics of eighteenth-century sailing fleets. It was basically for such reasons that the British Admiralty insisted upon the retention of full sail power, in addition to engines, in most of their battleships almost to within living memory.

The technical difficulty of combining sail with steam propulsion lay less in the nature of engines and sails than in the developments which took place during the nineteenth century in guns and armour. Turret guns require a wide angle of fire, besides being very heavy. The necessary protective armour was even heavier. To combine the required fields of fire, and also adequate stability, with full sail propulsion constituted a very difficult problem in naval architecture. In the 1860s the Admiralty were understandably inclined to proceed cautiously. If they had been allowed to continue to do so, all might have been well and history might have been considerably different.

This applecart was upset by a certain Captain Cowper Coles. Coles was one of those clever men with an exceptional talent for controversy and publicity. Having invented a new sort of gun-turret, he set himself to persuade the Admiralty to build a battleship around it with full sailing rig and therefore unlimited range. Coles managed to involve, not only the Admiralty, but also both Houses of Parliament, the Royal Family, the Editor of The Times and practically the whole of the Establishment in what became one of the greatest publicity exercises of its kind.

Tiring eventually of being called ‘reactionary' by half the newspapers and more than half the politicians in the country, the Admiralty gave way. They did what they had never done before, and will certainly never do again; they allowed a serving naval officer with no qualifications in naval architecture to design his own private battleship and have her built at the public expense.

The ship was built by Lairds at Birkenhead as Coles's responsibility and with none of the usual checks on design. She was, moreover, built in a blaze of vituperation and controversy. For much of the time Coles himself was ill and unable to leave his home in the Isle of Wight to attend the yard. As a result of all this muddling, the ship ended up about 15 per cent overweight. If this had not been the case it is at least possible that the ship would have been a success and comparatively safe.

As it was, the Captain was much too deep in the water and her C.G. was much too high up. Subsequent calculations showed that the ship would capsize if allowed to heel beyond an angle of 21°. However, the ship was commissioned in 1869 with much publicity. She made two deep-water cruises to the great satisfaction of The Times and of the First Lord of the Admiralty, who had his own midshipman son transferred into her. It looked as if the problems of world power, without the encumbrance and potential embarrassment of world bases, were going to continue to be soluble.

On her third voyage, returning from Gibraltar in 1870 in company with the rest of the Channel Fleet, H.M.S. Captain suddenly capsized in a rather moderate squall in the Bay of Biscay. 472 lives were lost – more than the total British dead at Trafalgar. Both Cowper Coles himself and the First Lord's son were drowned. Only seventeen men and one officer were saved.

Though not, of course, the sole factor, the loss of the Captain had a powerful effect in accelerating the change from sail to steam, or rather on the abolition of the full sailing rigs in big battleships. Whatever the technical consequences, the political ones were extensive. It will be remembered that the Suez Canal, which was opened just before the Captain was launched, originally belonged effectively to France. Disraeli bought the Suez Canal shares for the British government in 1874, and the acquisition of a worldwide chain of coaling stations became a political necessity. The whole story of the Captain disaster is complicated, but the immediate technical cause was undoubtedly the determination to ensure that the masts and hull of the ship should have really adequate strength – regardless of weight. It was one of many structural accidents in which nothing actually broke, but the causes were just as' structural' as if they had.

Aeroelasticity -or a reed shaken by the wind

When a fluid, such as air or water, flows past an obstruction, which might be a tree or a rope, eddies of fluid are formed behind it. Quite often, if you observe a reed or a bulrush growing in a fairly slow-moving river, you will see that the eddies in the sliding water are formed first on one side, then on the other, alternately. The result is a rhythmic variation of fluid pressure, from one flank of the obstruction to the other. Such a succession or ‘street' of eddies is called a ‘Karman strasse', after the aerodynamicist von Karman, who first described it. It is often quite easy to see eddies on the surface of smooth water though eddies in air are invisible unless they are shown up by smoke or dead leaves or some similar indicator. In fact, however, just the same Karman strasse of eddies happens when air blows past a flag or a tree or a wire. The result of these alternate eddies, acting first on one side then the other, is that the flag flaps, the tree sways and the telegraph wires sing and hum in the wind. Thus a sail will flap as soon as the sheet is eased and may very well split itself or injure somebody. I remember seeing a man knocked out by a flogging sheet-block; there is a lot of energy involved. When a big ship is tacking in a breeze, the noise is as loud as gunfire and much more impressive.

If the frequency of the aerodynamic stimulus provided by the eddies happens to coincide with one of the natural periods of vibration of the obstruction, then the amplitude of the movement may increase until something breaks. It is this sort of thing, rather than steady wind pressure, which usually accounts for trees being blown down. In a somewhat more sophisticated way this is also what is rather too apt to happen with aeroplanes and suspension bridges. It can be prevented by making the structure adequately stiff, especially in torsion. As we have already remarked, it is the torsional stiffness requirements which generally govern the design, and the structure weight, of modern aircraft.

Although Telford's Menai suspension bridge was quite badly damaged by wind-induced oscillations not long after it was built, it took about a century for the reality of this danger to register properly with bridge designers. The classic catastrophe was that of the Tacoma Narrows bridge in America in 1940. This bridge, which had a span of 2,800 feet (840 metres), was built without adequate torsional stiffness. As a result it swayed in even a moderate breeze to such an extent that the locals immediately christened it ‘Galloping Gertie'. Quite soon after it was built it swayed and wriggled itself into a dramatic collapse in a wind of only 42 m.p.h. Fortunately somebody happened to be present with a film in their cine-camera. The camera worked and the price of the film must have turned out to be a good investment, since it has been shown repeatedly in practically every engineering school in the world ever since (Plate 20).

In consequence modern suspension bridges are built with adequate stiffness, especially torsional stiffness. As in aircraft, the stiffness requirements account for a good proportion of the weight of the bridge. In the case of the Severn road bridge (Plate 12), for instance, the decking is made from a very large steel tube of flattish six-sided section, built up from mild steel plates. During construction this tube was floated out in sections, which were hoisted into place and then welded into a continuous structure.

Engineering design as applied theology

In nearly all accidents we need to distinguish two different levels of causation. The first is the immediate technical or mechanical reason for the accident; the second is the underlying human reason. It is quite true that design is not a very precise business, that unexpected things happen, that genuine mistakes are made and so forth; but much more often the ‘real' reason for an accident is preventable human error.

It is rather fashionable at present to assume that error is one of those tilings for which it is not really fair to blame people, who, after all were ‘doing their best' or are the victims of their upbringing and environment, or the social system – and so on and so on. But error shades off into what it is now very unpopular to call ‘sin'. In the course of a long professional life spent, or misspent, in the study of the strength of materials and structures I have had cause to examine a lot of accidents, many of them fatal. I have been forced to the conclusion that very few accidents just ‘happen' in a morally neutral way. Nine out of ten accidents are caused, not by more or less abstruse technical effects, but by old-fashioned human sin – often verging on plain wickedness.

Of course I do not mean the more gilded and juicy sins like deliberate murder, large-scale fraud or Sex. It is squalid sins like carelessness, idleness, won't-learn-and-don't-need-to-ask, you-can't-tell-me-anything-about-my-job, pride, jealousy and greed that kill people. Though some engineering firms have splendid design teams, far too many firms in this country are technically incompetent – often to a criminal extent. Many of these people have risen from the shop floor, and, out of a mixture of pride and meanness, they intensely resent any suggestion that they should seek proper advice or employ qualified staff.

It is my experience that far more accidents occur every week than ever get into the papers; generally they are caused by lack of proper care and professional competence. I very much doubt if the remedy lies in the imposition of yet more regulations. It seems to me that what is wanted is the creation of more public awareness and a climate of opinion which regards such ‘mistakes' as morally culpable. The man who drilled a hole in the wrong place in the wing-spar of a wooden aeroplane, plugged the hole, and said nothing, was acquitted. Presumably the jury thought that the moral blame was negligible.

What is wanted is much more publicity; the difficulty lies in the law of libel. In most cases, if the real causes of an accident are made public, somebody's face will be very red, and it is likely that their business or professional reputation will suffer. Most practising engineers are acutely aware of this and have to keep quiet or risk heavy damages. In my opinion there should be some way round this, for it is in the public interest that accidents and blunders should be publicized.

Though the great majority of structural accidents are sordid back-street affairs which we hear very little about, there are, of course, a certain number of great dramatic accidents which, for a while, monopolize the headlines. Of such a kind were the Tay bridge collapse in 1879, the capsize of the Captain in 1870, and the R101 disaster in 1930. These are very often intensely human and intensely political affairs, caused basically by ambition and pride. The sinking of the Captain was of this nature: the two men who carried the heaviest moral responsibility paid heavily for their faults, the one with his own life, the other with that of his son. Unfortunately a great many other lives were lost too.

The wreck of the airship R101, which hit the ground and was burnt out at Beauvais in 1930, was basically similar. There is a splendid account of this by Nevil Shute in his book Slide Rule. The immediate technical cause of the accident was the tearing of the fabric of the outer envelope; this fabric had apparently been embrittled by improper doping treatment. The real reason for the disaster was, however, pride and jealousy and political ambition. The Labour government's Air Minister, Lord Thompson, who carried the ultimate responsibility, was burnt to death in the accident, along with his valet and nearly fifty of the crew.

Nevil Shute's account of the events leading up to the accident corresponds extraordinarily closely in character with my own experience of rather comparable circumstances. One can at once recognize a certain atmosphere of Gadarene inevitability about the whole procedure. Under the pressure of pride and jealousy and ambition and political rivalry, attention is concentrated on the day-to-day details. The broad judgements, the generalship of engineering, end by being impossible. The whole thing becomes unstoppable and slides to disaster before one's eyes. Thus are the purposes of Zeus accomplished. People do not become immune from the classical or theological human weaknesses merely because they are operating in a technical situation, and several of these catastrophes have much of the drama and inevitability of Greek tragedy. It may be that some of our text-books ought to be written by people like Aeschylus or Sophocles – these writers were not humanists.

* * *

* Arnold, 1966.

† Each ‘tour of duty' for an airman in Bomber Command consisted of thirty sorties or operational flights. Such service was therefore exceptionally dangerous. The loss of life in Bomber Command was comparable to that of the German U-boat crews, which was notoriously high.

* The extra 20 per cent was required by the airworthiness authorities so as to cater for variations in the material and in the assembly procedures.

* An act of God has been defined by A. P. Herbert as ‘That which no reasonable man would expect'.

† Bread upon the Waters (published in The Day's Work).

* She died of T.B. at the age of twenty-seven. What she actually did was more intelligent and much more seamanlike than one would infer from the popular stories and pictures.

* Except, of course, the engine-room bulkheads.

* K. C. Barnaby, Some Ship Disasters and their Causes (Hutchinson, 1968).

Chapter 16 Efficiency and aesthetics

-or the world we have to live in

‘ Why don't you have Mr Smith in your Cabinet, Mr President?'

‘I don't like his face.'

‘But the poor man can't help his face!'

‘Anybody over forty can help their face.'

第 15 章

罪魁祸首 —— 误差、金属疲劳与操作不当

你有没有听说过单驾马车的绝妙。

它以如此合理的方式制造，

百年如一日，它飞驰奔跑，

然后，突然间，它就……

—— 奥利弗·温德尔·霍姆斯（Oliver Wendell Holmes），

《单驾马车》（The One-Hoss Shay）

整个物质世界非常适合被看作一个宏大的能量体系：在一个庞大的市场中，能量的一种形式总是按照设定的规则和价格被换成另一种形式。在能量上有利的事情迟早会发生。在某种意义上，结构是一种装置，其存在的目的就是延迟某些在能量上有利的事件的发生。在能量上有利的事情包括重物落地、应变能释放等。重物迟早会落地，应变能迟早会释放，但结构的职责在于将这类事件延迟一季、一生或者数千年之久。最终，所有结构都会被破坏或摧毁，正如凡人终有一死。医学和工程学的目的就在于将这些事情推迟到适宜的时间再发生。

问题是：「适宜的时间」是什么时候？每个结构的建造肯定都是为了使之在合理预期的工作寿命内是「安全的」。对于一个火箭燃料箱，这个时间可能是几分钟；对于一辆汽车或一架飞机，可能是 10 年或 20 年；对于一座主教座堂，或许是 1 000 年。至于奥利弗·温德尔·霍姆斯的「单驾马车」，建造它是为了用上 100 年（不多不少）。其计划的崩溃时间是在 1855 年的 11 月 1 日，事实也确实如此，犹如牧师布道时讲到「最后一点」一样。但是，这当然是胡说八道。此外，在尼维尔·舒特（Nevil Shute）的《没有捷径》（No Highway）中，邪恶而英勇的哈尼先生预言了「驯鹿」客机的机尾在飞行时数达到 1 440 小时 —— 误差为一天左右 —— 之后将因「金属疲劳」而失效。作为一名资深的飞机设计师，尼维尔·舒特肯定清楚，这也是胡说八道。

在实践中，不可能精确设计出这么多小时或这么多年的「安全」寿命。我们只能依据积累的数据和经验，从统计学意义上考虑这个问题。然后，无论安全裕度如何，只要看起来合理，我们就可以建造出来。一直以来，我们的一切都是基于概率和估计。如果我们制造的结构太弱，可能会节省重量和资金，但它过早断裂的可能性会变得极大。反之，如果我们制造的结构很强，以至于对人类来说它或许「可永久使用」（这正是大众期望的），那么它可能会非常笨重和昂贵。如我们将会看到的，在许多情境中，额外重量招致的风险会高于相应的强度增长所规避的风险。因为我们不可避免地基于统计学工作，当我们为现实生活设计一个实用结构时，我们必须接受的事实是，不管多小，总会存在一定的提前失效风险。

阿尔弗雷德·帕格斯利爵士（Sir Alfred Pugsley）在其作品《结构的安全》（The Safety of Structures）[1] 中指出，正是在这个相当有趣的领域中，我们可能不得不舍弃逻辑严密的问题解决方式。如帕格斯利所说，人类的情绪对结构失效的恐惧异常敏感，而外行人则极其固执地认为，与他们相关的任何结构或装置都应该是「牢不可破的」。这会发生在各种各样的联系中；有时它是无害的，而有时效果正相反。在上一次战争期间，飞机设计师在某种程度上可以选择是否以飞机的结构安全性换取其他品质。敌军行动造成的轰炸机损失非常高，大约每 20 架中会损失一架。[2] 相较之下，结构失效导致的飞机损失非常少，远低于万分之一。一架飞机的结构几乎占其总重量的 1/3，用削减轰炸机结构部件的重量来换取其他优势是合理的。

如果这样做，结构的事故率会略有上升，但节省下来的重量可被投入到更有利于防御的枪炮或更厚的护甲上。这样一来，净伤亡率或总伤亡率无疑会明显下降。但是，飞行员不会同意这种做法。他们宁愿冒被敌军击落的巨大风险，也不愿面对飞机因结构问题而在空中解体的更小风险。

帕格斯利认为，从某种意义上说，因结构破坏而产生的不安感可能遗传自我们栖身树上的祖先，他们特别害怕自己身下的栖木会断裂 —— 一旦发生这种事，婴儿、摇篮等都会摔落。此外，祖先和他们的婴儿也会落入地上的剑齿虎等天敌之口。不管这是不是真正的原因，工程师都必须考虑到这类感受，虽然增加的额外重量可能使其自身陷入危险。

强度计算的准确性

任何关于强度和安全性问题的理性解决方法都隐含着这样的假设：工程师应该能够准确地预测一个计划建造的新结构的强度，即便他自身也会怀疑它预计能用多久。对诸如绳索、链条、直梁与支柱之类的简单结构，情况可能大致如此；但是，正如我们在第 4 章中看到的，对更精密和更重要的人工制品来说，比如飞机和船舶，情况则完全不同。

因为有关于各种不同结构的大量经验可用，有针对这一课题的大量高质量的数学文献，还有学院派的弹性研究者引以为傲的关于结构理论的长篇大论的演讲，所以这种疑虑可能会被视为庸人自扰。然而，它是对的。

例如，考虑一下关于飞机强度的统计数据。因为节省重量很重要，也因为失效的后果非常恐怖，所以飞机的结构设计自然要倾注许多细致的考虑与思考，每个细节都要一丝不苟地检查。制图和计算是由技艺精湛的设计师、应力分析师和制图员运用最科学的方法完成的。之后，强度的计算会交给一组完全不同的专家进行独立核验。因此，最终做出的强度预测要尽可能准确和缜密。最后，为确保万无一失，还要进行全尺寸机身的破坏实测。

要给出真正的最新结果是不可能的，因为近年极少有不同类型的飞机被订购，以致这些数据并不具有统计学上的显著性。然而，随着飞机变得更简单也更便宜，相当多的设计至少走到了原型阶段。1935—1955 年，英国制造出差不多 100 种不同的飞机并进行了破坏测试。因此，这一时期的结果具有相当可靠的统计学意义上的指导性。

当然，这些不同类型飞机要求的强度的实际数据千差万别，要根据飞机的大小和类型而定。但是，每个设计团队的目标都是，让强度达到行话所谓的「120% 全因子载荷」。[3] 如果结构设计完全是一个严谨的专业，当绘制曲线或「直方图」时，人们就可以预期，各种测试结果紧密聚集在 120% 全因子载荷值的附近，偏差极小。换言之，结果应该产生一条狭窄的「正态」或钟形曲线，如图 15–1 所示。

图 15–1 实验飞机强度的预期统计分布

众所周知，这类事情压根儿没有发生。当把结果绘制成统计图时，直方图看起来很像图 15–2。实验强度倾向于随机分布在约 50%~150% 的要求载荷或全因子载荷之间。也就是说，即使是最卓越的设计师，也不能指望他在上限是下限三倍的区间内准确预测飞机的强度。其中一些飞机的强度还不到应有的一半；而另一些的强度又太大，以至于比所需重量沉得多。

对船舶来说，实在找不到数据来支持这种判断 —— 因为几乎从未有船舶在实验室条件下做过破坏测试。所以，我们不可能知道船舶工程师的工作做得多好或多糟，至少在强度预测方面是这样。然而，我们在第 5 章中说过，船舶的结构性事故的数量相当可观，时至今日，每吨英里的事故数量似乎很有可能仍在增加。

图 15–2 1935——1955 年，测试架上被破坏机身强度的实际分布（非常近似的示意图）

至于桥梁，其强度计算问题在某些方面要比船舶和飞机容易，因为其负载条件的变化较少。尽管如此，现代桥梁的失效数量还是十分巨大的。

基于实验的设计

如今建造轻便马车，让我来为你明言，

某处总会有个最弱点 ——

或在轮轴，或在轮胎、轮辋，或在弹簧、车辕，

或在门板、横木，或在底板、窗沿，

或在螺钉、螺栓，或在支撑皮带 —— 凡此隐患，

不论何处，你必须发现，你也必将发现。

—— 奥利弗·温德尔·霍姆斯，《单驾马车》

当然，正是理论设计过程的不可靠性，导致我们必须对所有飞机做实验性的强度测试。但是，实验性方法的好处还可以进一步扩展。我们假设，设计师的目标应该是确定测试过程中结构初次失效所需的载荷。不过，即便是设计最科学的结构，也不太可能让各个部位的强度保持一致，就像传说中的单驾马车，其上

…… 车轮之强，正如车辕，

底板之强，正如窗沿，

门板之强，正如底板 ——

测试架上的结构会在最薄弱的地方断裂。因此结构的其他部位都具有更大的强度。如果机身的初始失效仅需 120% 的全因子载荷，那么结构的绝大部分强度就其作用而言就太高了，而这额外的强度完全被浪费了。但是，我们无从知晓在哪里以及如何减轻结构。反复测试大型结构既费钱又费时，所以在时间和资金允许的情况下，如果可能，最好让初始失效发生时的载荷充裕地低于公认的 120%。由此显露出来的薄弱之处随后即可得到强化，整个结构也可以再次进行测试，以下类推。

战时的蚊式轰炸机是历史上最成功的飞机之一，其初始失效发生在 88% 因子载荷的条件下和尾翼的翼梁上。随后，飞机被逐步强化，直到达到 118%。部分原因在于，机身重量格外轻而强度特别高，从而使这架飞机性能出众。

大致说来，这是达尔文式的方法，大自然似乎就是依靠这种方法发展其自身结构的，虽然相较于大多数文明开化的人类工程师，它好像没那么匆忙，也不太在意生命的价值。在很大程度上，这也是汽车及其他便宜的量产商品的制造商采用的方法。这些人倾向于故意把商品制造得太弱而不堪其用，并依靠顾客的投诉来发现显著缺陷。

因此，设计中大量预测强度的要素可被归结为一种游戏，我们则设法在其中找出负载系统上最薄弱的环节。结构越复杂，它就变得越困难和越不可靠。幸运的是，从家具、建筑物到飞机，许多结构的设计之所以没有沦为完全荒谬的工序，依靠的事实就是刚度要求可能比强度要求更严格。因此，如果结构的刚度足以满足要求，那么它极可能也具备足够的强度。因为结构的挠变取决于它的整体性质，而不是「最薄弱环节」的存在，所以刚度预测的实现要比强度预测容易得多，也可靠得多。这就是我们在谈论「凭眼睛」设计一个东西时真正表达的意思。

它会撑多久？

福西里德斯亦曾言：

岩石堆砌的小堡垒，

次序若得宜，其精美，

远胜令你迷乱的尼尼微。

—— 福西里德斯（Phocylides）

雅克·海曼教授在探讨砖石制主教座堂的强度与稳定性时，就定下了这样的原则：如果一个结构能站立 5 分钟，它就会屹立 500 年。对建在岩石上的砖石结构，宽泛地讲，这是真的。但是，许多主教座堂和其他建筑物都建在了松软的地面上。如果这种松软的土壤发生蠕变（第 7 章）—— 这种情况经常发生，奇怪的事情就会发生，比如比萨斜塔。这样的运动会花些时间，而且常常可被预测到，但纠正起来却非常昂贵，很多古今的建筑物都是因为这个缘故倒塌或被拆除。

在大多数结构类型中，腐朽和锈蚀是非常活跃的衰败动因。部分原因在于人们对腐朽的畏惧，导致英国的工程师和建筑师反对使用木料。然而，美国、加拿大、斯堪的纳维亚和瑞士的那些极其愚昧的外国人每年在他们国家建造大约 1 500 000 座木屋，似乎也没被腐朽问题困扰到如此程度，看看他们是怎么做的或许是个好主意。在这些国家，木材的使用增势不减。

木料天生的耐腐性差别极大，以至于英国劳氏船级社规定了每一种用于造船的木料的固定使用年限。然而，依靠现代的知识和保养方法，几乎任何种类的木材都有可能获得近乎无限的使用寿命。

大部分金属都会在使用过程中遭到腐蚀。现代低碳钢的锈蚀情况比维多利亚时代的锻铁或铸铁严重得多，所以锈蚀在某种程度上是一个现代难题。因为劳动力成本高，所以钢制品的上漆和保养成本也很高。这给了使用钢筋混凝土一个好理由，因为嵌入混凝土的钢材不会生锈。事实上，像油轮这样的大型现代船舶在被建造出来后的使用寿命约为 15 年；总体上，做报废处理比上漆翻新更划算。汽车的使用寿命还要更短，通常也是出于同样的原因。的确，某些结构可以使用不锈钢，但这绝非一劳永逸的防锈蚀之道，而且不锈钢很贵，又难于制造。除此之外，不锈钢的疲劳性质通常很糟糕。

这些都是我们选择使用铝合金的部分原因；但是，除了额外的成本，铝合金的刚度在很多情况下被证明是不足的。焊接铝的困难也是一个障碍。一些国家看到铝材的巨大前景，于是大力投资兴建铝厂。伦敦的股票市场因 1961 年英国铝业公开收购英国管道投资公司而大幅振荡。然而，铝材市场并没有扩张到涉足相关交易的商人所预期的程度。不管怎样，制铝比炼钢需要耗费更多的能量。

即使一个结构的材料不会劣化，其使用寿命也可能要受限于统计结果，有时可以算出来，有时则算不出来。许多结构仅在相当特殊的情况下才有可能被破坏，而这类情况可能很长时间都不会出现。就船舶而言，可能是反常的巨浪；对飞机来说，则可能是异常剧烈的上升阵风。有些结构也许只能被不寻常的事件组合破坏，对一座桥梁来说，可能是强风与特殊交通载荷的组合。虽然对这样的无妄之灾我们应有所防备，但它们可能还要过许多年才会发生。所以，一个根本不安全的结构可能会坚持很长时间不倒塌，只是因为它从未经过充分的考验。

当然，负责任的工程师也会尝试预测这类事情，并为之做结构上的准备，但在很多情况下，这样的载荷峰值逐渐变为保险公司所谓的「天灾」。如果一艘船撞上一座大桥，桥船俱毁，就像最近在塔斯马尼亚发生的事情，那么我们很难指望船舶工程师或桥梁设计师应从结构的角度为此做些什么。这个问题不在于结构工程师，而在于当地的引航协会。此外，飞机的设计也不应考虑撞上山丘的情况。在一定程度上，我们确实在设计汽车时考虑了撞上砖墙而不致乘客送命的情况，但之后我们也不会指望这辆车还能有多大用处。

金属疲劳与哈尼先生

导致结构的强度损失的最大隐患之一是「疲劳」，即变载荷的累积效应。关于金属疲劳的令人吃惊的可能性的描述首见于 1895 年的通俗文献，吉卜林记录说，格劳陶号由于艉轴上的疲劳裂缝在比斯开湾某处发生螺旋桨脱落事故。之后，人们渐渐淡忘了这件事。到了 1948 年，尼维尔·舒特的《没有捷径》又重新唤起了大众对金属疲劳的兴趣。无论是作为一本书还是一部电影，这个故事的成功无疑部分归功于哈尼先生这一有代表性的科学奇才角色，但或许更主要的原因是之后不久发生的三次「彗星」客机空难。不久前惠斯勒曾评论过，大自然的技艺一直在增长。「彗星」客机的事故情况与《没有捷径》中的那些想象没有多大区别，除了有更多人丧生并对英国的航空工业造成了更大的损害。

事实上，工程师对金属疲劳效应的了解可追溯到 100 多年前。的确，工业革命后不久，人们就开始注意到机械的运动部件有时会在对固定零件绝对安全的载荷与应力作用下发生断裂。这对铁道列车而言尤其危险，火车的轴有时会在使用一段时间后突然莫明其妙地断开。这种效应很快就被称为「疲劳」，关于这一课题的经典研究是在 19 世纪中叶由一位叫沃勒（Wöhler）的德国铁路官员做出的。从照片上看，沃勒看起来完全是一副人们印象中的德国 19 世纪铁路官员的模样，但他的确做了一项非常有益的工作。

如我们在第 5 章所说，即便划痕或裂缝尖端处的局域应力可能很高，只要它比临界格里菲斯裂缝长度短，该裂缝也不会扩展，因为要使之扩展就需要对其做功并达到材料的「断裂功」。然而，当材料中的应力处于波动状态时，金属的晶体结构内就会发生缓慢的变化，这尤其可能发生在应力集中的区域。这些变化导致金属的断裂功减小，以致裂缝会非常缓慢地扩展，即使它有可能比临界长度短得多。

这样看来，应力作用下的金属上的任何孔洞、划痕或不平整处都可能发展出一条看不见的细小裂缝，也有可能扩展贯穿该材料，这个过程大体上不会有任何显著性变化。对于常见或一般的裂缝，这样一条疲劳裂缝迟早会达到临界长度。当这种情况发生时，裂缝会加速扩展，径直贯穿材料，经常会带来非常严重的后果。在失效发生后我们通常很容易通过其独有的条状或带状形貌诊断出疲劳裂缝。但在断裂前，早期的疲劳失效实际上是不可能被发现的。

当然，冶金学家和其他人对他们的材料做了大量疲劳测试，许多不同类型的测试仪器如今都可用于此目的。我们通常要考虑金属在反向应力（±s）作用下的疲劳特性，这种应力会产生于转动的悬臂中，比如车轴。（我们也可以将这些结果转化为变应力。）这个反向应力（±s）可被绘制成函数图像，其横坐标表示施加到试样上并使之失效的反向应力次数（n）的对数。这个图有时被称作「S–N 曲线」。

钢材典型的 S–N 曲线如图 15–3 所示。显然，该曲线呈狗后腿状的曲折样式，大约在经过 100 万次反向应力作用后变平，可能相当于汽车或列车的车轴运行 3 000 英里，或普通的汽车发动机运转约 10 个小时（发动机当然转得比车轮快得多）。对像钢铁这样的材料来说，存在一个明确定义的「疲劳极限」，这给了工程师极大的安慰。如果他的发动机或车辆能转 l06 或 l07 圈（可能只需要花几个小时），那么它就有望是永远安全的。但疲劳一直是一个需要考虑的危险因素。

图 15–3 典型的钢铁疲劳曲线

铝合金没有明确定义的疲劳极限，但其曲线倾向于逐渐下降，大致如图 15–4 所示。这使得它们用起来更危险，也解释了某些显然老派的偏好，即倾向于在机械和其他结构中使用钢材。

图 15–4 黄铜和铝等有色金属合金常常显示不出任何可明确定义的疲劳极限

「彗星」客机的事故发生在 1953 年和 1954 年，自然引起了恐慌与合理的警觉。阿诺德·霍尔爵士（Sir Arnold Hall）携手一个庞大的专家团队对这些事故的调查堪称经典，不仅是在工程检测方面，而且是在远洋搜救方面。其中一架飞机的碎片坠入了地中海，需要从 300 英尺或 50 英寻（1 英寻约为 1.8 米）以上的深度将它们打捞上来。搜救人员设法将几乎整架飞机都找了回来，数不清的碎片被铺放在法恩伯勒的一座大型机库的地面上。我还记得，其中没有一块碎片超过 2~3 英尺宽。

「彗星」客机是拥有密封增压机身的最早一批客机，其主要目的当然是使乘客免受因海拔高度变化导致的大气压改变而带来的不适和危险。从前，在飞越落基山脉时，人们常常不得不一边戴着氧气面罩一边吃午餐，现在这已经成为人们丧失的技能之一。在密封增压的飞机上，机身实际上成了一个圆柱状的压力容器，和一个薄壁锅炉没什么不同，它会随飞机每次爬升和下降而增压和放松。

「彗星」客机设计的致命错误在于，设计人员没有充分意识到在这些环境中机身金属应力集中部位发生「疲劳」的危险性。「彗星」客机是用铝合金建造的，而德哈维兰公司先前的大部分制造经验都来自木制飞机，比如大获成功的蚊式轰炸机。我并不是说德哈维兰公司非常能干的设计人员对疲劳知之甚少，而是铝合金疲劳的危险性很可能未足够深入他们的集体意识。比起金属，木材不那么容易陷入这种危险，这是它的巨大优势之一。

在每次事故中，裂缝似乎总是从机身上同样小的孔洞开始，缓慢而不被察觉地扩展着，直到达到临界格里菲斯裂缝长度。于是，外壳发生灾难性的撕裂，机身像鼓胀的气球一样爆炸。在法恩伯勒，通过用大型水箱反复给「彗星」客机机身增压，阿诺德·霍尔爵士重现了该效应，使它可以以慢动作的形式被观察到。

「彗星」客机事故发生的部分原因是，肯定存在的疲劳裂缝从未被检查人员发现，这或许是因为他压根儿没打算发现它们，但更有可能是因为裂缝太短而不易看见。如今，飞机机身被设计成可安全容纳约 2 英尺长的裂缝，有人会认为这么长的一条裂缝几乎不可能不被及时发现。然而，有一个故事是这样的：伦敦机场的两位清洁工在某天深夜，完成了对一架空客飞机机舱的清扫工作。她们关上舱门，走下舷梯，来到停机坪。

「玛丽，你忘关洗手间的灯了。」

「你是怎么知道的？」

「你难道没看到从机身裂缝里透出来的光吗？」

木制船舶的事故原因

在铁路时代之前，几乎所有的载重运输都是走水路。除了远洋贸易、欧陆贸易及依靠内河与运河的内陆贸易，还有更大规模的沿海贸易。成千上万的小型木制双桅和多桅帆船 —— 就是雅各布斯（W. W.Jacobs）漫画中呈现的那些 —— 可以运送任何东西，不仅能到达沿岸海湾和海港，还能抵达几乎所有可能或不可能的海滩。一艘船会在涨潮时停泊在海滩上，当潮水退去后，码头工人会将它运载的煤炭、砖块、石灰或住宅家具卸到停在旁边的货运马车上。当潮水再次涨起来时，它又会驶向大海，如此循环往复。

这自然是一桩相当冒险的生意，但在 18 世纪，大多数较小的船只都负担得起在冬季最糟糕时节的歇业整修，全体船员可以照看家人，光临酒馆。但这种略显安逸也不是特别危险的状态被 19 世纪更具竞争性的局面打破了。在商贸压力下，船只必须整个冬天都要从事贸易，通常不能坐等天气好后再工作。这些小帆船的守时的确会让许多现代货运列车羞愧难当。

这当然是有代价的。19 世纪 30 年代中期，英国沿岸附近平均每年发生 567 起船只事故；其结果是，平均每年有 894 人丧生。按每吨英里的交付货物计算，相较现代货运卡车，这些数据是更好还是更糟，我真的不知道。但无论如何，当时社会大众的良心受到煎熬，英国议会也成立了一个特别委员会调查「船只失事原因」。在听取了大量证词后，该委员会报告，除去次要原因，英国的船只事故主要可归因于下述状况：

1. 构造缺陷。

2. 设备不足。

3. 维修不力。

他们宣称：「似乎是英国劳氏船级社 1798—1834 年采用的分级制度（即有关建造与维修受保船舶的规章）加剧了船舶的构造缺陷问题。」

该委员会补充说，政府按船只吨位征税的制度催生了完全经不起风浪的船体形状。几个世纪以来，官僚主义的思维似乎没有发生太大变化。

平心而论，为船舶或其他任何类型的结构的强度和安全设立规章，是一件极其困难的事情。毫无疑问，自 19 世纪 30 年代以来，在此事上已取得一定的进展。同时，从另一种意义上说，大量的技术进步也被阻断了，尤其是受阻于各种不同的营建条例。就像帕格斯利在《结构的安全》中指出的那样，对结构的强度做出既能防傻瓜和恶棍，又不会阻止或妨碍发展与创新的规定，本身就是不可能的事。对结构安全性的规定想来是必要的，但其中一些不仅徒劳无功，还成为事故的实际原因。

回到木制船舶上来。不仅是快速帆船，还有小型的双桅方帆船、前桅横帆双桅船、中帆多桅船和驳船 —— 如此漂亮和令人满意 —— 皆不复存在，往昔用于建造它们的帆桁现在改用于游艇。木制游艇的结构难题或多或少要比更大的船只严重。虽然游艇的船体在运载石块或煤炭货物时不会在卵石滩上颠簸，但它们面临一个更困难的问题，即它们的薄外壳不适于抵抗局部冲击。

现在，驾驶小游艇远航已变得时髦，船体的抗冲击强度问题也因此变得重要起来。在深水海域航行的游艇屡遭虎鲸袭击而沉没。这种动物重约 6 吨，游速在 30 节左右。它们似乎特别憎恶小游艇，能在吃水线下撞出个洞来。这种情况如今经常发生，以至于再也不能将其归为「天灾」，而是一种必须加以防范的重大风险。

将小游艇的侧面建造得又厚又强足以抵抗这样的攻击，可能是不切实际的。在被撞出洞后，最好的方法是借助某种充气漂浮装置使游艇浮在水面上，最好还可以航行。迄今为止，那些在这类事故中幸存的人都是乘坐救生艇逃生的，他们中的大多数人必然会经历一段非常难熬的日子，数天或数周之后才被一艘蒸汽轮船救起。

锅炉和压力容器

在铁路系统得到完善之前的许多年间，大量的客运和特快货运靠的都是蒸汽轮船。在 19 世纪上半叶，不仅有比今天更多的蒸汽轮船驶向更多的欧陆港口，还有很多轮次往来于英国的城镇间。应该注意到，从伦敦到纽卡斯尔、爱丁堡或阿伯丁等地方，最廉价通常也是最快和最舒适的航线就是乘坐蒸汽轮船。

蒸汽轮船的事故发生次数要比帆船少，这只是因为蒸汽轮船的数量本就更少。尽管如此，1817—1839 年，在英国水域蒸汽轮船发生了 92 起重大事故，其中有 23 起要归咎于锅炉爆炸。这虽不及几年后美式内河蒸汽轮船的糟糕纪录，但也够糟糕的了。

某些早期锅炉是用铸铁等不适宜的材料制造的，诺里奇号上的一个铸铁锅炉就发生了爆炸，致多人死亡。即便锅炉是用较为适宜的锻铁制造的，它们常常也会被忽略以致生锈，直到爆炸。这就是福法尔郡号于 1838 年在法恩群岛沉没的原因，其中有 5 个人因格蕾丝·达林 [4] 卓越的船舶驾驶技术而获救。

英国议会又责成一个委员会于 1839 年提交事故调查报告，并形成一份广泛、彻底、确凿和几乎令人难以置信的文件。在蒸汽机四处轰鸣的年代，即便只是头脑清醒的轮机室工作人员也几乎是千金难求，称职、负责或聪明的相关人才更是凤毛麟角。这些人用无知和粗心的态度对待他们的发动机和锅炉，这简直让人不敢相信。例如：

在一艘从爱尔兰驶向苏格兰的蒸汽轮船上，指挥官察觉到船在夜间驶过平静海面的速度比平常快得多。工程师不在他的岗位上，于是船长询问司炉员发动机为什么转得这么快。司炉员答道：「不好说，因为锅炉里没有多少蒸汽，但火烧得很猛。」船长走近外露安全阀紧闭的烟囱，开始四处查看，他发现一个熟睡乘客的大半个身子压在扁平干酪状的安全阀配重上。这个人带着一些行李，将他的床铺在那儿以便取暖。船长唤醒并让他移开，阀门升起来，蒸汽咆哮而出，表明它已达到很高的气压。

司炉员没有水银气压计来测量蒸汽压，所以他习惯尽量靠近放气点的位置：没听到放气，他便认为蒸汽量很低；他对实情一无所知，虽然发动机增速应当让他察觉到事有蹊跷。

几位通讯员都提到，轮机员、司炉员乃至船主频繁被撞见坐在甚至是站在安全阀上，或者吊起配重并将他们的身体靠在操作杆上，以便在启动时提高蒸汽压。

该报告接着说，他们还会把多余的燃煤堆在安全阀上，赫拉克勒斯号蒸汽轮船就是因为这个原因爆炸的。总而言之，十分显著的是，仅在调查期间，英国蒸汽轮船的锅炉爆炸就造成 77 人身亡。

铁路的事故记录和蒸汽轮船几乎一样糟，原因也差不多。在七八十年间，相继发生了一系列非常严重的事故，其中最后一次发生在 1909 年左右。机车锅炉爆炸了，但气压计示数却几乎为零。调查结果表明，技工把安全阀的方向装错了，它根本没法放气。气压计示数几乎为零，只是因为指针已走完整整一圈却停在了止动销的反面。这起事故造成三人死亡，还有三人重伤。

近来，锅炉爆炸的次数已大幅下降。这部分是因为蒸汽锅炉的制造与维护现在受到法律和保险公司的严密控制，但或许更多是因为如今使用的蒸汽发动机相当小，而那些实际存在的工厂几乎都是大型工厂，比如发电厂，想必它们都是由称职的人来运营的。

但是，锅炉何时不是锅炉了？这是一个相当有趣的法律问题。工业领域中有大量的压力容器，它们被用于各种制造过程。许多这类容器的设计比传统锅炉更复杂和更不寻常，可能也没那么危险。通常，对其制造和使用的控制不像普通锅炉那么严格。然而，许多这类容器都是经工艺蒸汽或受压热油加热的，致使其破裂的后果可能也很糟糕。请记住，在暴露于湿蒸汽的低碳钢结构中，焊接金属的疲劳极限可能会降至 ±2 000 psi。

在我亲历的一个事故中，用于制造涂塑纸的两个大型旋转鼓轮从低压油加热转换为蒸汽加热，而且是高压工艺蒸汽。为确保万无一失，保险公司的检查员坚持用从低碳钢板上切割下来并焊接到位的大三角撑板或托架，将扁平的端板与圆柱形外壳连接起来，以此「强化」鼓轮内部。

经短时间的蒸汽加热后，两个正在使用的鼓轮爆炸了。根据图纸，我计算出在两个鼓轮中，应该有 48 处会失效。结果证明这是一个悲观的估计，实际只有 47 处失效。幸运的是，无人员身亡或重伤。但保险公司的检查员的行为有些不合适，我本以为他是一个勤奋好心的小伙子。

另一个案例则更悲惨。一家化工承包公司从别处购进混合容器，并将之安装在他们为客户建的工厂中。因为这种混合容器要用受压油加热，所以密封增压加热的锅炉套要接受冷水「验收测试」。在安装之前，它经受住了 65 psi 的压强而无明显损坏。然而，当工厂投产后，锅炉套里被灌满了只有约 23 psi 的高温热油，只使用了几个小时锅炉就爆炸了，一个人身上被溅了 280 摄氏度的液油，几天后就死了。

根据官方检查员的报告，这起事故可能只是我的委托人 —— 这家化工公司 —— 严重管理不善的后果。因此，相关化学工程师已身陷高等法院非常烦琐和昂贵的诉讼中。

事实上，基于对破碎残骸的错误观察而出具的事故官方报告，是相当具有误导性的。容器之所以爆炸，不是因为我的委托人处理不当，而是由于设计和制造不当。虽然事故的技术原因实际上略显微妙，但我的委托人还有实际制造该容器的人都没把设计当回事儿。事实上，这个容器从未得到真正精密的设计，不过是在一家小巷子里的焊接作坊中「凭肉眼」组装出来的。

事情的真相是，在「验收负载」期间，将用密封增压加热的锅炉套接合在一起的主要焊缝发生了相当大的变形，但当时却没有人注意到。这些焊缝接近于失效状态，以至于锅炉套上低得多的压强产生的几次反向应力便足以造成疲劳失效的灾难性后果。一位训练有素的工程师应该可以发现并指出这个问题。在法律上看，或公平地看，主要的责任要算在容器制造者的头上；但我不禁想到，一群称职的化学工程师应该也可以预见到这种危险。当我去看他们时，总经理带我出去吃午餐。交谈间我问他：「你的公司里有多少个拥有学士学位的工程师，先生？」

「一个也没有，感谢上帝！」

致命的洞

虽然在现有结构上打洞通常被看作轻率之举，但一些人似乎就是忍不住要这样做。「大师号」飞机便是明证。这种飞机是战前为英国皇家空军建造的高级教练机，兼具飓风式战斗机和喷火式战斗机的一些使用性能和许多操纵性能。在 1940 年的危急时刻，一些「大师号」飞机的机翼上被加装了 6 架机关枪，并改作战斗机。它的原始教练机所具有的线控操纵面，虽然完全令人满意，但其做出的反应比一架真正的战斗机略显「柔弱」。因此，有人决定将战斗机版「大师号」飞机中的联动装置由线控方式改为杆控方式。为给方向舵和升降舵的操纵杆腾出空间，要在机身后舱壁上切出合适的槽孔。

不久之后，三起致命事故接踵而至。在每一起事故中，机尾都在飞行过程中发生脱落。当把机身放到测试架上时，我们发现其强度已下降到仅为全因子载荷的 45%。我认为，其中的教训就是切莫画蛇添足。

此类事故中更广为人知的一次发生在伯肯黑德号运兵舰上，造成了大量的人员伤亡。这艘铁制蒸汽轮船拥有足够的强度和连续的水密隔舱，它作为军舰的生涯始于 1846 年。然而，当它改作运兵舰时，英国陆军部坚持要在其横向的水密隔舱壁 [5] 上切出非常大的开口，为舰载部队提供更多的光线、空气和可见的空间。

1852 年，伯肯黑德号被派往印度，途经好望角，有 648 人登船，包括 20 名妇女和儿童。由于引航错误，它撞上了距离南非海岸约 4 英里的一块孤立礁石。这艘船前部撞出了一个大洞，而且因为舱壁被切开了，船前部的所有运兵舱被迅速淹没，导致舰载部队中的许多人都淹死在他们的吊床上（时间是凌晨两点）。

在涌入海水的重量作用下，被淹没的舰船前部断裂，随即沉没，留下的幸存者都挤在舰船后部，缓慢地下沉。月黑风高，海里到处是鲨鱼，救生艇又不够用。舰载部队表现得英勇无畏、训练有素，他们迅速地退到后甲板上，妇女和儿童则被送上仅有的救生艇。所有的妇女和儿童都得救了，另有 173 位男性幸存，其他人要么葬身海底，要么亡于鲨鱼之口。

在舱壁上打洞的最明显后果当然是该舰船的各舱室迅速被水淹没，这无疑是沉船的主要原因。然而，如果这艘运兵舰没有被一分为二，可能就不会造成这么大的人员伤亡，而这至少部分归咎于舱壁被切开导致整个船体的强度被弱化。

伯肯黑德号的沉没很快就成了普鲁士士兵训练有素和展现英雄气概的著名范例，这也是理所应当的。当消息传到柏林时，普鲁士国王下令将此事迹传谕全军各级单位，特别是为此接受检阅的部队。但是，如果他能命令陆军部不得干预舰船结构，可能就更好了，毕竟军人们总是弄不明白这件事。

卓越的船舶工程师巴纳比（K. C. Barnaby）先生说，多年来，人们一直认为运兵舰拥有开放的空间比安全性更重要。他说，直到 1882 年船主们还在抱怨，当他们按英国海军部的要求安装附加舱壁时，部队管理部门仍会以舱壁间的空间太小为由而拒不接受这些船舶。[6]

超重

几乎每个结构最终都倾向于比设计者想要的更重。这部分归因于称重部门过于乐观的估计，但也是因为几乎每个人都有「求稳」的倾向，从而使每个部分都比实际所需更厚也更重。在许多人眼中，这是一种美德 —— 诚实正直的标志。我们说东西「造得厚重」是一种赞扬，而说「造得轻巧」则几乎和「不结实」或「粗制滥造」同义。

有时候这无关紧要，但在有些情况下，它确实至关重要。从制图版开始，飞机的重量倾向于不断增加。额外的重量自然限制了飞机的燃料容量或有效载荷，但除了总重的增加，飞机的重心总会设法以某种方式朝机尾过度偏移。换句话说，机尾的重量有增加的趋势，而且与机身其余部位不成比例。这是一个严重的问题。如果重心过于靠近机尾，飞机飞行时就会发生危险，它可能会陷入无法恢复的尾旋。基于这个原因，数量惊人的飞机 —— 包括一些非常著名的机型 —— 在其使用寿命内，都得用螺栓将铅配重块永久地固定在它们的机头上；为了让重心保持在可容忍的安全位置上，这是必要之举。不用说，这太糟糕了。

超重对船舶的影响也很糟糕，甚至更糟糕。不仅所有船体都会绝对超重，在这种情况下，还会使重心倾向于朝上偏移而非朝后偏移 —— 不可避免地上移。现在，一艘船的稳定性，即其正面朝上而非颠倒过来或偏向一侧的漂浮趋势，取决于所谓的「稳心高度」。它是一个叫「稳心」的隐秘而重要的点与船舶重心之间的垂直距离，出于充足的理由，即便一艘大型船舶的稳心高度也很可能相当小 ——1~2 英尺或更小。因此，重心的位置只需升高几英寸就能使稳心高度显著减小，这很可能危及船舶的安全。基于这个原因，很多船舶会在下水时倾覆，但毫无疑问，造船厂工头或者造成额外顶部重量的人会认为这不是他们的错。

我们在第 11 章中提过英国皇家海军舰长号的沉没。舰长号的整个故事在当时极具政治性和争议性，我认为很少有事故能产生如此深远的历史影响。舰长号代表了蒸汽战列舰演变的一个转折点，或许也是世界强国的现代概念的转折点。英国海军部经常受到对船舶知之甚少的历史学家的批评，理由是船舶从风帆动力转变为蒸汽动力的进程过于缓慢。这些历史学家有时正是对「帝国主义扩张」等大加挞伐的那些。

务必牢记，直到最近，不可靠的发动机、高的煤炭消耗量和短程的蒸汽战舰才使得他们可以依靠基地、加煤站和「殖民地」冒险离开本国水域。世界强国对蒸汽舰队的运用方式迥异于 18 世纪风帆舰队的战略与后勤。出于这样的基本原因，近年来英国海军部曾坚持在他们的大多数战列舰上保留除蒸汽机之外的全风帆动力。

风帆与蒸汽动力结合的技术难点不在于蒸汽机和风帆的性质，而在于 19 世纪期间枪炮和装甲的发展。炮塔上的火炮除了非常笨重之外，还需要宽广的射角，必要的防护装甲也要更重些。所需的射界、足够的稳定性与全风帆动力结合在一起，构成了船舶工程领域的一个大难题。19 世纪 60 年代，英国海军部当然倾向于谨慎行事。如果允许他们继续这么做，那么一切可能都安好，只是历史可能会截然不同。

这个美梦被海军上校考伯·科尔斯打碎了。科尔斯是一个聪明人，在论战和宣传方面具有非凡的天赋。他发明了一种新型炮塔，所以他得尽力说服海军部为这种炮塔建造一艘具备全帆装的战列舰，从而获得无限射界。科尔斯不仅要说服海军部，还要斡旋于议会两院、皇室、《泰晤士报》的主编和几乎所有当权派之间，这成了一次伟大的公共事件。

海军部厌烦了被英国一半的报纸和超过半数的政客称为「顽固派」，于是最终做出了让步。他们做了一件空前绝后的事情，即允许一位不具有船舶工程学历的现役海军军官设计一艘私人战列舰，并且是用公费建造。

这艘船是由伯肯黑德的莱尔德造船厂建造的，由科尔斯负责，但没有经过常规的设计检查。并且，该船是在一片谩骂和争议声中建造的。在大部分时间里，科尔斯都在病中，不能离开他在怀特岛的家去造船厂监工。最终结果是，这艘船超重了 15% 左右。如果不是这种情况，这艘船至少有可能会成功，并且比较安全。

事实上，这艘舰长号吃水太深，重心又太高。后续计算表明，如果倾斜的角度超过 21 度，这艘船就会倾覆。然而，这艘船在 1869 年大张旗鼓地下水服役了。它进行了两次深水巡航，《泰晤士报》和海军大臣对它甚是满意，后者还将自己在海军军校当见习生的儿子调到了这艘军舰上。没了基地遍布世界的累赘和潜在难堪，世界强国的难题似乎陆续得到了解决。

1870 年，皇家海军舰长号在第三次航行期间，与海峡舰队的其余舰船一起从直布罗陀返航，行至比斯开湾时遇到中等强度的风暴，意外倾覆。472 人因此丧生，超过特拉法尔加海战中英军的阵亡总数。考伯·科尔斯和海军大臣的儿子都不幸遇难，只有 17 名士兵和 1 名军官获救。

当然，即便不是唯一因素，舰长号的沉没也有力地推动了风帆动力向蒸汽动力的加速转变，并废除了大型战列舰上的全帆装。不管技术结果如何，其政治影响都是广泛的。还记得，原来属于法国的苏伊士运河正好在舰长号下水前开始通航。1874 年，迪斯雷利为英国政府买下了苏伊士运河的股份，收购一条世界范围内的加煤站链成了一个政治需要。舰长号灾难的整个故事很复杂，但直接的技术原因无疑是一心确保船的桅杆和船体具备真正足够的强度，却忽视了重量因素。在这次结构性事故中，没有什么东西真正断裂，而原因却是「结构性」的，许多结构性事故都属于这种。

随风摇曳的芦苇

当空气或水等流体流经一个障碍物时，比如一棵树或一条绳索，它的后面会形成涡流。通常，如果你观察生长在流动十分缓慢的河中的一株芦苇或菖蒲，就会发现涡流会先在一边形成，然后是另一边，如此交替。其结果是流体压强会发生有节奏的变化，从障碍物的一侧变到另一侧。这样一种涡流的交替或「街道」被称为「卡门涡街」，以空气动力学家冯·卡门的名字命名，他第一个描述了这一现象。我们通常很容易在平滑的水面上看到涡流，但空气中的涡流是看不见的，除非它们被烟、枯叶或某些类似的指示物显示出来。然而，事实上，完全相同的卡门涡街会发生在空气流经一面旗帜、一棵树或一根电线时。这些交替的涡流先作用于障碍物的一侧再作用于其另一侧，结果是旗帜迎风飘扬，树木随风摇曳，电线在风中嗡嗡作响。因此，帆绳一松，帆就会四下翻飞，极有可能被撕裂或伤及旁人。我见过一个人被滑脱的帆绳打昏过去，其中牵涉了大量能量。当一艘大船在微风中曲折前行时，噪声会如枪炮声般响亮，令人印象深刻。

如果涡流提供的气动刺激频率恰好与障碍物的一个自然振动周期一致，那么运动的幅度可能会增大到使有些东西发生断裂。正是这类现象而非稳定的风压，通常导致树木被吹倒。在飞机和悬索桥上，这种情况也极易以某种更复杂的形式发生。让结构具备足够的刚性，尤其是抗扭刚度，就能够防止这种情况。我们已经讨论过，通常支配现代飞机设计和结构重量的是对抗扭刚度的要求。

虽然特尔福德的梅奈悬索桥在建成后不久便因遭风振而严重受损，但这一危险的实质要在大约一个世纪之后才被桥梁设计师正确解释。1940 年，典型的灾难发生在美国的塔科马海峡大桥上。这座桥的跨度为 2 800 英尺（约 840 米），并不具备足够的抗扭刚度。因此，即便是在四级风中，它的摇摆程度也足以令当地人将其命名为「舞动的格蒂」。建成后不久，在风速只有 42 英里 / 小时的情况下，它竟然剧烈摇摆以致轰然坍塌。碰巧现场有人带着摄影机和胶片，拍下了整个过程。购买这段影像到头来肯定是一笔不错的投资，因为此后世界上几乎每个工科学校都会反复播放它（见插图 20）。

因此，现代悬索桥要建造得具备足够高的刚度，尤其是抗扭刚度。就像对飞机来说一样，刚度的要求占据桥梁重量的很大比例。例如，对赛文悬索桥（见插图 12）来说，其桥面是用一根非常巨大的钢管铺成的，钢管截面为扁平的六边形，由低碳钢板制成。在建造施工期间，这根钢管是分段输送的，吊装到位后，再焊接成一个连续的结构。

工程设计中体现的人性弱点

在几乎所有事故中，我们都需要分辨两个不同层次的原因。其一是直接的技术或机械原因，其二是潜在的人为原因。设计确实不是一项非常精确的事，意料之外的事情会发生，错误也会发生，但更多时候，事故的「真实」原因是可以预防的人为失误。

目前流行的假设是，将失误归咎于人实属不公，毕竟他们已「竭尽全力」，只是或受制于教育、环境，或受制于社会制度等。但是，失误渐渐转变为如今非常不受欢迎的所谓「罪行」。我将很长的职业生涯花费或浪费在研究材料和结构的强度上，所以我有机会去检视大量事故，其中许多都是生死攸关的。我被迫得出的结论是：极少数的事故是与道德无关的。九成事故的原因不在于有些深奥的技术效应，而是老派的人为罪过 —— 通常接近于平庸之恶。

当然，我不是指蓄意谋杀、大肆欺诈或性侵害等更恶劣极端的罪行。我指的是能置人于死地的肮脏罪行，比如粗心大意、懒惰闲散、「不学也不问」、「你别对我的工作指手画脚」、骄傲自满、妒忌和贪婪。虽然某些工程公司拥有豪华的设计团队，但英国有太多公司在技术上是不称职的 —— 经常达到犯罪的程度。其中许多人都出身于生产车间，既傲慢又小气，他们强烈憎恶任何让他们寻求适当的意见或雇用合格的员工的建议。

据我的经验，每周发生的事故要比报纸报道的多得多，原因一般是缺乏适当的维护和专业技能。我十分怀疑颁布再多的规章可能也于事无补。在我看来，我们需要的是增强公众意识和营造舆论环境，把这样的「错误」视为道德上有罪。一个人在木制飞机翼梁的错误位置处钻了个洞，他堵上了洞并且没有声张，就这样逃脱了罪责。想必陪审团也认为道德责任是无足轻重的。

我们需要的是更多的宣传活动，难点在于反诽谤法。在大多数情况下，如果事故的真实原因被公之于众，有些人会非常羞愧，其业务或职业声望可能会受损。大多数执业工程师深深意识到这一点，不得不保持缄默，否则就会冒遭受严重损失的风险。在我看来，为了公众的利益着想，应该找到一条解决之道，使事故和愚蠢的错误在媒体上公开。

虽然绝大多数结构性事故都是见不得人的肮脏事，但我们极少会听说。当然，也会有一定数量的令人吃惊的重大事故，一度独占新闻头条，比如，1879 年苏格兰泰河铁路桥的坍塌，1870 年舰长号的倾覆和 1930 年的 R101 号飞艇空难。这些事故往往是由野心和自负所致的人为或政治事故。舰长号的沉没就属此类：承担最重的道德责任的两个人为他们的过错付出了沉重的代价，一个赔上了自己的性命，另一个赔上了儿子的性命。不幸的是，其他人也因此丧命。

R101 号飞艇于 1930 年在法国博韦坠落并烧毁，情况基本上也是类似的。尼维尔·舒特在他的书《计算滑尺》中对此进行了精彩的记述。这起事故的直接技术原因是布蒙皮的撕裂，该布皮显然因加入了不合适的添加剂而变得脆化。然而，这场空难的真正原因是自满、妒忌和政治野心。工党政府的航空大臣 —— 汤普森勋爵承担了最终责任，他在事故中被烧死，一同丧生的还有他的贴身男仆和差不多 50 位机组人员。

尼维尔·舒特对这起事故原因的记述，格外接近我在类似情况中的亲身经历。人们能立即认识到整个过程中充斥着加大拉人的某种氛围。在自满、妒忌、野心和政治对抗的压力下，人们把注意力都集中在了日常琐事上。广泛的判断，工程学上的运筹帷幄，最终都化为了不可能。整件事情就在人们眼前不可阻挡地走向灾难，宙斯的目的由此达成。人们并不会因在技术情境下行事而摆脱古典或神学意义上的人性的弱点，这些灾难中的好几个都具有希腊悲剧式的戏剧性和必然性。或许我们的一些教科书应该由像埃斯库罗斯或索福克勒斯这样的人来写，这些作家不是人文主义者。

[1] Arnold, 1966.

[2] 在英军轰炸机指挥部，飞行员每回「执勤」都包括 30 次出动或任务飞行。因此，这样的任务格外危险。轰炸机指挥部麾下的人员伤亡堪比德国 U 型潜艇的人员损失，那可是出了名的高。

[3] 额外的 20% 是适航管理部门要求的，为的是适应材料和装配工序的变化。

[4] 达林在 27 岁时死于结核病。她的实际贡献比流传至今的故事和图片展现出来的更大，她更像一个技艺娴熟的水手。

[5] 当然，轮机室的舱壁除外。

[6] 参见 K. C. Barnaby, Some Ship Disasters and their Causes (Hutchinson, 1968).



