There are those who moan about ‘meaningless ornament'; but the phrase is surely an oxymoron, for no ornament can be ‘meaningless' – even if it means something pretty frightful. If the critic wants to imply ‘ornament which is unsuitable or unrelated to its substrate', that is fair enough; but all ornament must have some effect. It seems to me that what we want is more, not less ornament. The truth seems to be that we are frightened to express ourselves in ornament. We don't know how to handle it, and fear that we may expose the nakedness of our mean little souls. Medieval masons did not have that kind of inhibition, and they were probably psychologically healthier in consequence.

Is it not fair to ask the technologist, not only to provide artefacts which work, but also to provide beauty, even in the common street, and, above all, to provide fun! Otherwise technology will die of boredom. Let us have lots of ornament. Let there be figure-heads on ships, gilded rosettes on the spandrels of bridges, statues on buildings, crinolines on women, and, everywhere, lots and lots of flags. Since we have created a whole menagerie full of new artefacts, motor cars, refrigerators, wireless sets and the Lord knows what, let us sit down and think what fun we can have in devising new kinds of decorations for them.

* * *

* W. M. Dixon, The Human Situation (Penguin, 1958).

* Vide the recent vogue for collecting chamber-pots. Aristophanes regarded Greek oil-bottles as essentially ridiculous but he never implied that they were ugly: indeed the ones in museums are much admired.

Appendix 1 Handbooks and formulae

Over the last 150 years the theoretical elasticians have analysed the stresses and deflections in structures of almost every conceivable shape when subjected to all sorts and conditions of loads. This is all very well, but usually the results, in the raw form as published by these people, are too mathematical and too complicated to be of much direct use to ordinary human beings who are in a hurry to design something fairly simple.

Fortunately a great deal of this information has been reduced to a set of standard cases or examples the answers to which can be expressed in the form of quite simple formulae. Formulae of this sort, covering almost any possible structural contingency, are to be found in handbooks, notably R. J. Roark's Formulas for Stress and Strain (McGraw-Hill). These formulae can be used by people like you and me equipped with little more than common sense, a knowledge of elementary algebra and the contents of Chapter 3. A few of these formulae are given in Appendixes 2 and 3 which follow.

Used with caution, such formulae really are very useful indeed, and indeed they form the professional stock-in-trade of most engineering designers and draughtsmen. There is not the slightest need to be ashamed of using them; in fact we all do. But they must be used with caution.

Make sure that you really understand what the formula is about.

Make sure that it really does apply to your particular case.

Remember, remember, remember, that these formulae take no account of stress concentrations or other special local conditions.

After this, plug the appropriate loads and dimensions into the formula – making sure that the units are consistent and that the noughts are right. Then do a little elementary arithmetic and out will drop a figure representing a stress or a deflection.

Now look at this figure with a nasty suspicious eye and think if it looks and feels right. In any case you had better check your arithmetic; are you sure that you haven't dropped a two?

Naturally neither mathematics nor handbook formulae will ‘design* a structure for us. We have to do the designing ourselves in the light of such experience and wisdom and intuition as we may possess; when we have done this the calculations will analyse the design for us and tell us, at least approximately, what stresses and deflections to expect.

In practice therefore design procedure often runs something like this. First, one determines the greatest loads to which the structure may be subjected and the deflections which can be allowed. Both of these are sometimes laid down by existing rules and regulations, but, where this is not the case, they may not be particularly easy to determine. This sort of thing calls for judgement, and in case of doubt it is clearly better to err on the conservative side, although, as we have seen, it is quite possible to go too far and incur danger from too much weight in the wrong places.

When the loading conditions have been determined we can sketch out, to scale, a rough design – designers often use pads of squared paper for their preliminary sketches – and we can then apply the appropriate formulae to see what the stresses and deflections are going to look like. At the first shot these will probably be too high or too low, and so we go on modifying our sketches until they seem about right.

When all this has been done, ‘proper' drawings may have to be made from which the thing can be manufactured. Formal engineering drawings are very necessary when components have to be made by the usual industrial procedures, but they are troublesome to make and may not be needed for simple jobs or amateur work. For anything of a commercial and potentially dangerous nature, however, it is my experience that a firm can look remarkably silly in a court of law if the only ‘drawing' they can produce is a sketch on the back of an envelope.

When you have got as far as a working drawing, if the structure you propose to have made is an important one, the next thing to do, and a very right and proper thing, is to worry about it like blazes. When I was concerned with the introduction of plastic components into aircraft I used to lie awake night after night worrying about them, and I attribute the fact that none of these components ever gave trouble almost entirely to the beneficent effects of worry. It is confidence that causes accidents and worry which prevents them. So go over your sums not once or twice but again and again and again.

Appendix 2 Beam theory

The basic formula for the stress s at a point P distant y from the neutral axis of a beam is

so

Figure 1.

where s = tensile or compressive stress (p.s.i., N/m2 etc.)

y = distance from neutral axis (inches or metres)

I = second moment of area of cross-section about the

neutral axis (inches4 or metres4)

E = Young's modulus (p.s.i., N/m2 etc.)

r = radius of curvatures of the beam at the section under consideration due to the elastic deflections set up by the bending moment M (M in. inch-pounds, Newton-metres etc.).

Position of neutral axis

The ‘neutral axis' (N.A.) will always pass through the centroid ('centre of gravity') of the cross-section. For symmetrical sections, such as rectangles, tubes, T sections etc., the centroid will be in the ‘middle' or centre of symmetry. For other sections, it can be calculated by mathematical methods. For some simple asymmetrical sections (e.g. railway lines) one can determine the centroid accurately enough by balancing a cardboard model of the section on a pin. For more elaborate structures, such as ships' hulls, the position of the neutral axis really will have to be calculated by sheer arithmetic.

‘I', the second moment of area of a cross-section

This is often (though incorrectly) called the ‘moment of inertia'.

Thus, if an element, at the point P, distant y from the neutral axis, has a cross-sectional area a, say, then the second moment of area of this element about the neutral axis will be ay2.

Figure 2.

Thus the total I or second moment of area of the cross-section is the sum of all such elements, i.e.

For irregular sections this can be calculated by arithmetic, or there is a version of ‘Simpson's rule 'which gives the answer.

For simple symmetrical sections:

For a rectangle about the neutral axis,

Figure 3.

For a circle about the neutral axis,

Figured 4.

Thus simple box and H sections as well as hollow tubes can be calculated by subtraction.

For a thin-walled tube of wall thickness t, however,

I = πr3t

Figure 5.

The Is of a great many standard sections can be looked up in reference books.

‘Radius of gyration', k

For some purposes, it is useful to know the value of what is called the ‘radius of gyration' of a beam section: that is to say, the distance from the neutral axis at which the area of the cross-section may be considered as acting,

i.e. I = Ak2

where A = total area of cross-section

k = ‘radius of gyration'

For a rectangle (see above) k = 0·289 d

For a circle (see above) k = 0·5 r

For a thin-walled annulus k = 0·707 r

Some stock beam situations

CANTILEVERS

Point load W at end

Condition at distance x from end of beam:

M= Wx Max M= WL at B Deflection at x is

Max deflection at A

Figure 6.

Uniformly distributed load W= wL

Deflection at x is

Max deflection at tip

Figure 7.

SIMPLY SUPPORTED BEAMS

3. Simply supported beam with load in centre

Bending moment Mat point x

Deflection y at x

Figure 8.

4. Simply supported beam with single point load not in centre Bending moment M at point x

Max deflection

at when a > b

Figure 9.

5. Simply supported beam with uniform load W = wL

at point x:

Max deflection at centre

Figure 10.

For further information, see Roark, R. J., Formulas for Stress and Strain (McGraw-Hill, current edition).

Appendix 3 Torsion

Torsion

For a parallel bar or prism or tube under torsion the twist or angular deflection θ (in radians) is given by

where θ = angle of twist in radians

T = torque in inch-pounds or Newton-metres

L = length of member subject to torsion (inches or metres)

G = shear modulus (Chapter 12), N/m2 or p.s.i.

K is a factor to be found from the following table.

Section K Max shear stress N

Solid cylinder radius r ½πr4 (at surface)

Hollow tube radii r1 and r2 ½πr(r14-r24) (at outer surface)

Hollow tube longitudinally slit (i.e.'C section)

Wall thickness t

Mean radius r ⅔πrt3

Any continuous thin-walled tube of thickness

t, perimeter U and

enclosed area A

Again, considerably more detailed information is to be found in Roark.

Appendix 4 The efficiency of columns and panels under compression loads

For a column

Assuming that the column is of such proportions that it is liable to fail by elastic buckling (Chapter 13), then the critical or Euler load P is given by

where E = Young's modulus

I = second moment of area of cross-section

L = length.

Now suppose the column to have a cross-section which can be expanded or contracted while remaining geometrically similar so that its size is characterized by a dimension t, say.

Then I = Ak2 = constant. t4

where A = area of cross-section

k = radius of gyration (Appendix 2).

If there are n columns, the total load sustained

so

so

But the weight of n columns = constant.nt2Lρ = W, say where ρ is the density of the material.

So

So efficiency of structure

The parameter is known as a ‘structure loading coefficient' and depends solely upon the dimensions and loading of the structure. The parameter is called a ‘material efficiency criterion' and depends solely upon the physical characteristics of the material.

For flat panels

The above arguments apply to a column whose thickness can be varied in two dimensions. The thickness of a flat panel can only be varied in one dimension.

Suppose second mpment of area per unit width of panel = I = Const.t3

for n panels

so

Const.

Weight of n panels per unit width = W,

So efficiency

Again is a ‘structure loading coefficient'

and is a ‘material efficiency criterion'.

Suggestions for further study

At the end of the day, the best way to learn about structures is through observation and practical experience: that is, by looking at structures with a seeing eye and by making them and breaking them. Of course the opportunities for the amateur to build real aeroplanes or bridges are likely to be rather limited; but do not be ashamed to play with Meccano, or even with old-fashioned building blocks. These things, incidentally, are much more instructive than the modern plastic toys which clip together in various ingenious ways. When you have built your bridge, load the thing up in a realistic way and see how it fails. You will probably be both surprised and disconcerted. When you have done this the rather dry books on structures will seem a good deal more relevant.

Although there is not much scope for the amateur bridge-builder, it has often seemed to me that the field is wide open in biomechanics. This is a new subject about which very little is known, either by the engineers or by the biologists. It is very possible that there is an opportunity here for the enterprising amateur to make a name for himself.

Though there are rather few good books, as yet, on biomechanics there are any number on materials and elasticity, A small and admittedly arbitrary selection is given below.

Books about materials

The Mechanical Properties of Matter, by Sir Alan Cottrell. John Wiley (current edition).

Metals in the Service of Man, by W. Alexander and A. Street, Penguin Books (current edition).

Engineering Metals and their Alloys, by C. H. Samans. Macmillan, New York, 1953.

Materials in Industry, by W. J. Patton. Prentice-Hall, 1968.

The Structure and Properties of Materials, Vol. 3 ‘Mechanical Behavior', by H. W. Hayden, W. G. Moffatt, and J. Wulff. John Wiley, 1965.

Fibre-Reinforced Materials Technology, by N. J. Parratt. Van Nostrand, 1972.

Materials Science, by J. C. Anderson and K. D. Leaver. Nelson, 1969.

Elasticity and the theory of structures

Elements of the Mechanics of Materials (2nd edition), by G. A. Olsen, Prentice-Hall, 1966.

The Strength of Materials, by Peter Black. Pergamon Press, 1966.

History of the Strength of Materials, by S. P. Timoshenko. McGraw-Hill, 1953.

Philosophy of Structures, by E. Torroja (translated from the Spanish). University of California Press, 1962.

Structure, by H. Werner Rosenthal. Macmillan, 1972.

The Safety of Structures, by Sir Alfred Pugsley. Edward Arnold, 1966.

The Analysis of Engineering Structures, by A. J. S. Pippard and Sir John Baker. Edward Arnold (current edition).

Structural Concrete, by R. P. Johnson. McGraw-Hill, 1967.

Beams and Framed Structures, by Jacques Heyman. Pergamon Press, 1964.

Principles of Soil Mechanics, by R. F. Scott. Addison-Wesley, 1965.

The Steel Skeleton (2 vols.) by Sir John Baker, M. R. Home, and J. Heyman. Cambridge University Press, 1960–65.

Biomechanics

On Growth and Form, by Sir D'Arcy Thompson (abridged edition). Cambridge University Press, 1961.

Biomechanics, by R. McNeil Alexander. Chapman and Hall, 1975.

Mechanical Design of Organisms, by S. A. Wainwright, W. D. Biggs, J. D. Currey and J. M. Gosline. Edward Arnold, 1976.

Archery

Longbow, by Robert Hardy. Patrick Stephens, 1976.

Building materials

Brickwork, by S. Smith. Macmillan, 1972.

A History of Building Materials, by Norman Davey. Phoenix House, 1961.

Materials of Construction, by R. C. Smith. McGraw-Hill, 1966.

Stone for Building, by H. O'Neill. Heinemann, 1965.

Commercial Timbers (3rd edition), by F. H. Titmuss. Technical Press, 1965.

Architecture

There are many hundreds of books on architecture. I have picked out two, almost at random:

An Outline of European Architecture, by Nikolaus Pevsner. Penguin Books (current edition).

The Appearance of Bridges (Ministry of Transport). H.M.S.O., 1964.

Index

Aberdeen, Lord

Aeroelasticity

Aesthetics

Agincourt, battle of

Aircraft:

biplanes

Comet

Concorden

Fokker

gliders

Master

monoplanes

Mosquito R

‘Reindeer'

strength of

wooden

Aneurisms

Antigone

Arches:

brick and stone

bridges

collapse of

corbelled

hinge-points in

names of parts

thrust lines in

Architecture:

Byzantine

Corinthian

Doric

Gothic

modern

Mycenaean

Norman

Romanesque

trabeate

Arteries

Austen, Jane

Babel, Tower of

Ballistae

Bats

Beams

cantilever

hogging and sagging

pre-stressed

rolled steel joists'

simply supported

stresses in

wooden

Benezet, Saint

Bias cut dresses

Biggs, Prof. W. D.

Blown-up structures

Blyth, Dr Henry

Boilers

bursting of

Bonds, interatomic, distortion of

Bones

calcium in

properties of

work of fracture

Bows:

broken

composite

cross-

long-

Odysseus's

palintonos

Parthian

rate of shooting

strain energy in

Tartar

Brazier bucklingr

Bridges:

arch, with suspended roadway

Avignon

Bridges

bowstring girder

Britannia

cast

iron

Clare

Clifton

Hell Gate

Humber

London

Maidenhead

masonry arch

Menai suspension

Saltash

San Luis Rey

Severn

suspension

Sydney Harbour

Tacoma Narrows

thrust lines in

trestle

Brunei, Isambard Kingdomn

Brunel, Sir Marcn

Buttresses

Cable-cars

Cars

Carthage, siege of

Catapults

ballista efficiency of

palintonon

trebuchet

Cats' tails

Cauchy, Baron Augustin

Cayley, Sir George

Chaplin, Dr Richard

Coal, effect of pressure on

consumption of

Coles, Captain Cowper

Collagen

Compression failures:

by crushing

by buckling

Conn, Prof. J. F. C.

Coulomb, Charles Augustin de

Cox, H. L.

Dams

Davy, Sir Humphry

de Havilland Aircraft Co.

Dionysius

Discs, slipped

Dixon, Prof. Macneile

Dracone barges

Ecole Polytechnique

Egg membrane, fracture of

Elastin

Empire State building

Energy:

conservation of

definition of

potential

strain

units of

Euler, Leonhard

Euler's formula

Eurymachus

Everest, Mount

Fatigue of metals

Finlay, James

Flexural centre in beams

Foetuses

Fracture, work of:

of bones

definition of

table of

variation with tensile strength

Fracture mechanicsn

Franklin, Benjamin

Friars, bridge building

Galileo

and square cube law

Germain, Sophien

Griffith critical crack length

Griffith principle

Guns, bursting of

Hagia Sophia

Hall, Sir Arnold

Heyman, Prof. Jacques

Hieroglyphics, Egyptian

Hooke, Robert passim

Hooke's law passim

Hupozomata

Ictinus

Ignorance, factor of

Inglis, Prof. C. E.

Insulae, Roman

Joints:

butt welded

in columns

glued

lapped

in masonry

to plastic

in rigging

riveted

in roof-trusses

scarfed

in tendons in tension members

welded

Kenedi, Prof. R. M.

King's College Chapel

Kipling, Rudyard

Lanchester, F. W.

Larynx, in men and women

Libel, law of

Mariotte, Edme

Masts

Material efficiency criteria

Mathematics

May, George

Meredith, George

Mersenne, Marin

Michell, A. G. M.

Middle third rule

Monocoques

Muscle:

collagen in

as an energy converter

energy dispersed in

in legs and arms

mechanism of contraction

strength of

Navier, Claude Louis Marie Henri

Newton, Sir Isaac

New York Trade Center

Odysseus

Paine, Thomas

Palintonon

Parthenon

Paul, Prof. J. P.

Penelope

Pipes

Poisson, S. D.

Poisson's ratio

Polygon, funicular

Pretlove, Dr Tony

Pterodactyls

Pugsley, Sir Alfred

Pyramid, Great

Resilience Rheims Cathedral

Rigging:

of ships

of young ladies

Riveted joints

RNA-DNA mechanism

Rockets

Roofs:

air supported

archaic Greek

over one's head

vaulted

Roof trusses

hammer beam

Rubber:

strain energy storage

stress-strain curve of

useless in biology

work of fracture of

Sacrifices, human

Safety, factors of

Sails

Salisbury, Lord

Salisbury Cathedral

Sandwich construction

Shear:

in dressmaking

failure in solids

modulus, G, definition of

nature of

relation with E and q

in rockets

in sails

in skin

strain, g, definition of

stress, N, definition of

in worms

Ships:

America, yacht

beauty of

Birkenhead, troopship

Captain, H.M.S.

Chinese

Cobra, H.M.S.

Egyptian

Great Eastern, S.S.

Greek

Leviathan, S. S.

Majestic, R.M.S.

Maltese

river steamers

sailing

steam

stresses in

structure of

Venetian

Victory, H. M.S.

Viking

Wolf, H.M.S.

wooden

Shute, Nevil

Siloam, Tower of

Skiamorphs

Ski-ing

Soane, Sir John

Solomon, King

Space-frames

Stephenson, Robert

Strain:

shear, definition of

tensile and compressive:

definition of; expression of

Strain energy:

as a cause of fracture

definition of

storage capacity, table of

units of

Strength:

of a material, definition of

of solids, tables of

of a structure, definition of

Stress:

factor

shear, definition of

tensile and compressive, definition

of

units of

Stress concentrations passim

how to live with

Stress trajectories

Stringed musical instruments

Structure loading coefficients

Suez Canal

Surface tension

Surgery, orthopaedic

Telford, Thomas

Temple of the Olympian Zeus

Tendon:

Achilles or calcaneal

in bows

in catapults in kangaroos

in legs and arms

strain energy in

strength of

Test pieces, tensile

Thompson, Sir D'Arcy

Thrust lines passim

in backbones

in bridges

Torsion:

in aircraft

in bridges

in cars

in chickens

in legs

Trees:

deflections of

growth of

height of

names of

scarcity of

strength of

Trusses:

Bollman

bowstring

Fink

hogging

hupozomata

Pratt or Howe

in shipbuilding

Warren

See also Roof-trusses

Tyres

Vincent, Dr Julian

Vionnet, Mlle

Vitruvius

Vocal cords

Voussoirs

Wagner tension field

Wainwright, Prof. Steve

Wallace, Sir Barnes

Watson, G. L.

Welding

Wheels

Wilkinson, John

Windows

Wine jars

Yachts: see Ships

Yew timber

Young, Thomas

Young's modulus:

definition of

table of

units of

Young's own definition of

