Part Two Tension structures

# 0601. Tension structures and pressure vessels

-with some remarks on boilers, bats and Chinese junks

That the ship went faster through the water, and held a better wind, was certain; but just before we arrived at the point, the gale increased in force. ‘If anything starts, we are lost, sir,' observed the first lieutenant again.

‘I am perfectly aware of it,' replied the captain, in a calm tone; ‘but, as I said before, and you must now be aware, it is our only chance. The consequences of any carelessness or neglect in the fitting and securing of the rigging will be felt now; and this danger, if we escape it, ought to remind us how much we have to answer for, if we neglect our duty.'

Captain Marryat, Peter Simple

The easiest structures to think about are generally those which have to resist only tensile forces – forces which pull rather than push – and, of these, the simplest of all are those which have to resist only a single pull: in other words unidirectional tension, the basic case of a rope or a rod. Although simple unidirectional tension is sometimes to be seen in plants – especially in their roots – the muscles and tendons of animals provide better biological examples and so do vocal cords and spiders' webs.

Muscle is a soft tissue which, when it receives an appropriate nerve signal, is able to shorten itself and so produce tensile forces by pulling in an active way.* However, although muscle is a more efficient device than any artificial engine for converting chemical energy into mechanical work, it is not very strong. So, to produce and sustain any considerable mechanical pull, muscles have to be thick and bulky. Partly for this reason muscles are often attached to the bones which they have to manipulate by means of an intervening cord-like tension member made of tendon. Although tendon is unable to contract itself, it is very many times as strong as muscle and therefore needs only a small fraction of the cross-section to take a given pull. Thus the function of tendon is partly that of a rope or wire, although it can also act as a spring, as we saw in the last chapter.

Although some tendons are quite short, many of those in our arms and legs are very long indeed, and they run through the body in almost as complicated a way as the wires of an old-fashioned Victorian bell system. As far as our legs are concerned, muscle is not only bulky but heavy, and the object seems to be to arrange for the centre of gravity of our legs to be as high up in the body as possible. The reason for this is that, in normal walking, the leg operates as a pendulum swinging freely in its own natural period and therefore consuming as little energy as may be. It is because we have to force our legs to oscillate faster than their natural frequency that running is so tiring. The natural period of swing of our legs will be faster the nearer the centre of gravity of the limb is to the thigh-joint. This is why we have thick calves and thighs and, hopefully, small feet and ankles.

However, large feet are not generally so severe a handicap in life's struggle as large hands, whatever people may say about policemen. Our arms, of course, have evolved from front legs, and they seem to have taken the process of remote control even further. Thus, by means of even longer and thinner tendons than exist in our legs, our hands and fingers are operated by muscles located quite a long way away, high up in our arms. So the hand is enabled to have much more slender proportions than would be the case if it had to contain all its own muscles. The advantage of this arrangement mechanically – and perhaps aesthetically – is obvious.

In artificial structures there are a number of simple examples of unidirectional tension, such as fishing lines and loads hanging from cranes. These differ very little from the problem of the brick and the string which we discussed in Chapter 3. However, many of the more interesting cases, such as the rigging of a ship or the design of aerial cableways, are apt to be beset by uncertainties and complications.

In the rigging of a ship there would, of course, be no difficulty about determining a safe thickness for each rope, provided only that one knew what loads they would have to carry. The difficulty lies in predicting the magnitudes of the many different forces which operate in so complicated an affair as a sailing ship. Although there are several ways in which one might set about this, I strongly suspect that most yacht designers prefer to rely on what might be described as experienced guesswork. However, it is just as well to get one's guesses right, since the failure of a vital piece of rigging is likely to result in the loss of a mast. If this happens when the ship is caught on a dangerous lee shore, like Marryat's frigate, then the consequences will be serious.

Nowadays ski-ing is a vast international industry which is dependent upon the reliability of many thousands of cable-cars and ski-lifts. I suppose that most of us have worried, in our more vertiginous moments, about the strength of the wire ropes which support chair-lifts and cable-cars above what seem to be rather frightening chasms. Actually, accidents very seldom occur directly from the failure of one of these cables in tension. This is because in this case the static loads are known pretty accurately, and it is not difficult to do the sums and ensure an ample factor of safety. More serious risks arise from such matters as the excessive swaying of the cables in the wind, so that the cars are likely to strike each other as they pass or perhaps to hit the supporting pylons. Here again, designers seem to rely mainly on precedent and guesswork.

A very different application of unidirectional tension theory is concerned with the strings of musical instruments. The frequency* of the note given out by a stretched string depends, not only on its length, but also upon the tensile stress in it. In stringed instruments the appropriate stresses are produced by stretching the strings – which are made of stiff material, such as steel wire or catgut – across a suitable framework, which may be the wooden body of a violin or the cast-iron frame of a piano. Since both the strings and the framework are stiff, very small extensions greatly affect the stress in a string and therefore the frequency of its note. This is why such instruments are so sensitive to ‘tuning'. It is also why one can use the note emitted by a rope when it is ‘twanged' as an indication of the stress in the material. The Roman army used to require that the officers in charge of military catapults should have a good musical ear, so that they could assess the tensions in the tendon ropes of these weapons when they were set up and tuned for action.

Although the human voice differs in many ways from a stringed instrument, somewhat similar considerations apply to it. The mechanisms of voice production are rather complicated, but our larynx plays an important part in both singing and talking. It may be interesting to note that the various tissues of the larynx are among the few soft tissues in the body which conform approximately to Hooke's law; most of the other body tissues obey quite different and rather weird laws of their own when they are stretched, as we shall see in Chapter 8.

The larynx contains the ‘vocal cords', which are strips or folds of tissue whose tensile stress can be varied by muscular tension so as to control the frequency with which they vibrate. Because the Young's modulus of the vocal folds is rather low, large strains sometimes have to be applied to them in order to cause the necessary stresses; they are, in fact, stretched by a good 50 per cent when we want to achieve the top notes.

Incidentally, the higher frequencies of the voices of women and children are caused, not by higher tensions in their vocal cords, but simply by the fact that the larynx is smaller and the vocal cords therefore shorter. There is a surprising difference in this respect between grown-up men and women, the relevant larynx measurements being about 36 millimetres for men against about 26 for women. However, the larynxes of both boys and girls are of very similar size up to the age of puberty. The ‘breaking' of boys' voices is due, not to any change of tension in the cords, but to a rather sudden enlargement of the larynx around the age of fourteen.

Pipes and pressure vessels

Plants and animals might be regarded to a considerable extent as so many systems of tubes and bladders whose function is to contain and to distribute various liquids and gases. Although the pressures in biological systems are not usually very high, they are by no means negligible, and living vessels and membranes do burst from time to time, often with fatal results.

In technology the provision of reliable pressure vessels is a fairly modern achievement and we seldom stop to think how we should get on without using pipes. For the lack of pipes capable of conveying liquids under pressure the Romans incurred enormous expenses in building masonry aqueducts upon tall arches in order to carry water in open channels across miles of undulating country. The earliest approximations to pressure-tight containers were the barrels of guns, and, historically, these were never very satisfactory and quite frequently failed. A list of the people who have been killed by the accidental bursting of guns, from King James II of Scotland downwards, would be long and impressive. Nevertheless, when gas lighting began to be installed in London, soon after 1800, the pipes had to be made by Birmingham gunsmiths, and in fact the earliest gas-pipes were actually made by welding musket-barrels end to end.

Although there are innumerable accounts of the history of the steam-engine, relatively little has been written about the development of the pipes and boilers on which it depended and which, in reality, presented more difficult problems than the actual mechanism. The earliest engines were very heavy and bulky and consumed vast amounts of fuel, chiefly because they worked at very low steam pressures – which was perhaps just as well in view of the nature of contemporary boilers.

The production of engines which were light, compact and altogether more economical was wholly dependent on the use of much higher working pressures. In the steamships of the 1820s, with steam pressures of about 10 p.s.i. – provided by square ‘haystack* boilers – the coal consumption was around 15 lb. weight per horsepower hour. In the 1850s engineers were still talking in terms of 20 p.s.i. and about 9 lb. per horse-power hour. By 1900, pressures had gone up to well over 200 p.s.i., and coal consumption had fallen to 1-5 lb. per horse-power hour – a tenfold reduction in eighty years. It was not the steamship, as such, which drove sailing ships from the high seas, but the high-pressure steamship with triple-expansion engines, ‘Scotch' boilers, low fuel costs and long range.

The high-pressure boiler was not developed without incident. Throughout most of the nineteenth century boiler explosions were relatively frequent and the consequences were sometimes very terrible. The American river steamers, in particular, were pioneers of high-pressure working. During the middle years of the century the Mississippi steamboats used regularly to indulge in dramatic races over thousands of miles of river. The designers of these vessels were prepared to sacrifice almost everything to speed and lightness, and they took what might charitably be called an optimistic approach to boiler design. As a result, during the years 1859-60 alone, twenty-seven of these ships were lost as a result of boiler explosions.*

Although some of these accidents were due to criminal practices such as the tying down of safety valves, most of them were basically caused by lack of proper calculations. This was a pity because in fact the basic calculations needed to determine the stresses in simple pressure vessels are very easy – so easy indeed that, as far as I can find out, nobody has ever bothered to claim the credit for originating them, and only the most elementary kind of algebra is required.†

Spherical pressure vessels

As soon as we come to consider any kind of pressure vessel or container – which includes such things as balloons and bladders and stomachs and pipes and boilers and arteries – we have to deal with tensile stresses which operate in more than one direction at the same time. This may possibly sound complicated but presents, in fact, no cause for alarm. The skin of any pressure vessel really performs two functions. It has to contain the fluid by being watertight or gastight, and it has also to carry the stresses set up by the internal pressure. Nearly always this skin or shell is subjected to tension stresses acting in both directions in its own plane, that is to say, parallel to its surface. The stress in the third direction, perpendicular to its surface, is usually negligibly low and can be forgotten about.

It is convenient to look first at pressure vessels of spherical shape. The skin or shell of the bladder-like object in Figure 1 is supposed to be reasonably thin, say less than about a tenth of the diameter. The radius of the shell, taken at the middle of the wall thickness, is r. The thickness of the wall or shell is l and the whole thing is subject to an internal fluid pressure of p (all these being in whatever units we happen to patronize).

If we imagine that we slice the thing in two, like a grapefruit, then from Figures 1, 2 and 3 it is pretty clear that the stress in the shell – in all directions parallel to its own surface – will be

This is a useful practical result, and it is in fact a standard engineering formula.

Cylindrical pressure vessels

Spherical containers have their uses, but clearly cylindrical vessels have wider applications, especially to things like pipes and tubes. The surface of a cylinder has no longer the same sort of symmetry as that of a sphere and so we cannot assume that the stress along a cylinder is the same as that around its circumference; and in fact it isn't. Let us call the stress in the shell along the length of the cylinder sx and that around the circumference of the shell s2.

Figure 1. A spherical vessel with internal pressure p, mean radius r, and wall thickness t.

Figure 2. Imagine the vessel sliced in two across any diameter. The resultant of all the pressure forces acting on the inside of each half of the shell must equal the sum of all the stresses which would have acted on the cut surface, whose area is 2πrt.

Figure 3. The resultant of all the pressure forces acting on the inside curved surface of a hemisphere will be equal to the same pressure acting on a flat disk of the same diameter, which must be πr2p. Hence

From Figure 4 we can see that the stress along the shell, s1 must be the same as that in the sphere which we have just been considering, that is to say

To get at s2, the circumferential stress in the shell of the cylinder, we now slice, in our imaginations, in the other plane, after the fashion of Figure 5; from which we see that

Thus the circumferential stress in the wall of a cylindrical pressure vessel is twice the longitudinal stress, i.e. s2 = 2s1 (Figure 6). One consequence of this must have been observed by everyone who has ever fried a sausage. When the filling inside the sausage swells and the skin bursts, the slit is almost always longitudinal. In other words, the skin has broken as a consequence of the circumferential, not the longitudinal, stress.

Figure 4. The longitudinal stress, s1 in the shell of a cylindrical pressure vessel is the same as that in the equivalent spherical vessel.

Figure 5. Circumferential stress in a cylinder, s2

Figure 6. Stress in the wall of a cylindrical pressure vessel.

These sums are continually cropping up in engineering and in biology. They are used to calculate the strength of pipes and boilers and balloons and air-supported roofs and rockets and space-ships. As we shall see in Chapter 8, the same simple piece of theory applies to the whole question of development from amoeba-like forms of life towards more elongated and mobile primitive creatures.

Another consequence of the algebra we have just done is that to contain a given volume of fluid at a given pressure will require a greater weight of material if we use a cylindrical vessel than if we use a spherical one. Where weight is very important – as it is with the oxygen-bottles which climbers use at high altitudes and also with aircraft starter bottles – then spherical vessels are usual. For most other purposes, where weight is not so serious a matter, cylindrical bottles are cheaper and more convenient. The ‘gas-cylinders ‘ used in hospitals and garages are a case in point.

Chinese engineering – or better bulge than bust

There is an interesting problem which has to be solved by the designer of every sailing vessel It is: What is the best method of preventing the ship from flinging her spars overboard? Opinion on this point is divided. There are two schools of thought: the Eastern and the Western schools. In the West we think the best way of keeping the masts in the ship is to fasten them rigidly in position with a complicated system of shrouds and stays. The disciples of the Eastern school hold that this is all nonsense – besides being very expensive. They stand a tall and rickety mast on end, set upon it vast areas of gunny mats, bamboo matting or anything else that comes to hand and then keep the whole business erect by the power of faith. At least, I have never been able to discover any other power interesting itself in the miracle.

Weston Martyr, The Southseaman

The theory of pressure vessels, which we have just derived, also applies, with minor modifications, to things other than closed containers: that is, to ‘open' membranes and fabrics which have to sustain pressure from the free movement of wind or water. Of such a nature are tents and kites and awnings and fabric-covered aircraft and parachutes and the sails of ships and windmills and eardrums and fishes' fins and the wings of bats and pterodactyls and the sails of the jellyfish called Portuguese men-of-war.

For all such purposes it is expedient and economical (as we shall see in Chapter 14) not to use a ‘rigid' panel or shell or monocoque but to cover a stiff open framework of rods or spars or bones with some kind of flexible fabric or skin or membrane. Such a structure cannot be quite rigid, and it will be realized that, as soon as any lateral force comes upon the membrane by reason of the pressure of wind or water, it must deflect or bow into a curved shape which, to a first approximation, may be treated as a part or segment of a sphere or cylinder, and so the stresses in the membrane will obey much the same laws as those in the shell of a pressure vessel.

From this it is very easy to show that the force or tension in the membrane, per unit width, is pr, the product of the wind pressure (p) and the radius of curvature (r) of the membrane. Thus the more sharply the membrane is curved the less the force in it will be, and so the load which it puts upon the supporting framework will also be diminished.

When the wind blows, the pressure caused by the wind increases as the square of the wind velocity. In a strong wind the pressure becomes very high indeed and so do the loads upon the supporting structure. According to our Western, engineering-school, way of thinking there is very little we can do about this, for we would rather be seen dead than allow the membrane – whether it be a sail or part of an aeroplane or whatever – to bulge appreciably between its supports. Of course, we can never manage to keep the fabric perfectly flat, but we do everything we can to keep it as taut as possible. What we actually do is to make the supporting framework strong and heavy and expensive and hope that it won't break – which of course it often does.

For instance, the rig which has been developed for modern racing yachts generally consists of tubular metal spars and almost inextensible Terylene sails. This aerodynamic mechanism is kept up to its job by many ropes and wires which, in turn, are tautened to a frightening degree by means of screws and winches and hydraulic jacks, all of which are needed to cope with the enormous loads set up in the sails when the vessel is sailing fast in a breeze of wind. The whole thing is a miracle of engineering ‘efficiency' but it is also horribly expensive. Ships of this sort convey to their occupants a feeling of tenseness which is anything but restful.

A simpler and cheaper way of doing the job is to arrange for the sail to bulge between its supports so that, as the wind pressure increases, the radius of curvature diminishes, and so the tension force in the canvas remains roughly constant however hard the winds may blow. Naturally, one has to ensure that the distortions which help to ease the structural problem do not create aerodynamic ones.

Figure 7. Chinese junk rig.

One elegant and satisfactory way of doing this has been devised by the Chinese, who, after all, have been sailing about the seas in moderate comfort and safety for a good many centuries. The rig of the traditional Chinese junk varies according to local custom but is generally very much like Figure 7. The battens which cross the sails are attached to the masts and, since the whole rig is constructed from flexible materials, as the wind increases, the sail bows out between the battens after the fashion of Figure 8 without much loss of aerodynamic efficiency. If it doesn't bulge enough it is quite simple to ease the halyard until it does. Lately, Colonel ‘Blondie' Hasler (of Bordeaux Raid fame) has taken up the Chinese lug sail with very satisfactory results. Several yachts with Colonel Hasler's rig have made long ocean voyages with success and in a comparatively relaxed manner. The ‘hang-gliders' which are now so popular are designed on much the same principles, and, although they may shock the traditionalists, they are cheap and strong and they do seem to work.

Figure 8. Edge-on view of a junk sail with halyard eased.

Bats and pterodactyls

Take from the goblin his crinkly face,

His pointed ears from the gnome;

Borrow the nose of a leprechaun

And smuggle it carefully home;

Sew bawkie fingers to banshee wrist;

Stitch gossamer vellum between;

Fit legs to straddle with knees atwist

From a body of velveteen.

Douglas English (Punchy 11 July 1923)

The resemblance between a bat and a Chinese junk is immediately obvious (Figure 9). In all bats the wings are constructed by stretching a membrane of very flexible skin over a framework of long, thin bones which are, in essence, the fingers of a hand, Fruit-bats, for instance, are quite large animals with a wing-span of four feet or something over a metre. In their native India, where they are a pest, they think nothing of flying thirty or forty miles in a night in order to rob an orchard. Since they can do this without becoming unduly exhausted they must therefore be efficient flying machines. Furthermore, to save weight, as well as what is called ‘metabolic cost', they have gone a long way in the matter of cutting down the thickness of their wing-bones.

Figure 9. The fruit-bat.

When a fruit-bat is photographed in flight it can be seen that, on the down-stroke of the wing, the skin membrane bulges upwards into a form which is roughly semi-circular, thereby minimizing the mechanical load upon its bones. It is clear that there can in practice be little or no aerodynamic loss as a consequence of this change of shape.

About 30,000,000 years ago the place of birds was largely filled by a wide range of flying creatures called Pterodactyls (finger-wings). Many of these much resembled bats, except that only one finger, the little finger, played any structural part. So the membrane wing of pterodactyls was rather like a Bermuda mainsail without any battens.

Figure 10. Pteranodon.

Some of these animals were very large. Fossil remains of Pteranodon, for instance, have been recovered which show that this beast reached a wing-span of 8 metres (27 feet) and possibly more. It stood about 3 metres high (10 feet), and it seems that its total weight was probably only about 20 kilograms (44 lb.). There was therefore little weight available either for bony structure or for flying muscles. Recently, the discovery of even larger pterodactyls, about twice the span of Pteranodon, has been reported from America.

Pteranodon was probably pelagic: that is to say, it filled, roughly speaking, the ecological niche which is now occupied by the albatross. Like the albatross, it seems to have lived mostly in the air, soaring close above the deep-sea waves and fishing on the wing. Even more than the fruit-bat, the wing bones of Ptetanodon appear, from the fossils, to have been almost unbelievably thin and fragile. Of course, we know nothing experimentally about the elasticity of the skin which covered these vast wings, but it seems fair to infer that this skin must have behaved very much like that of a bat. The aerodynamic efficiency of the whole system must have been high and comparable to that of the modern albatross.

Why do birds have feathers?

Although bats flourish and survive very well today, pterodactyls were superseded by birds, which have feathers, a great many years ago. It is possible, of course, that the extinction of pterodactyls had nothing to do with structural considerations, but it is also possible that there is something special about feathers which gives birds an edge over other flying creatures. When I worked at the Royal Aircraft Establishment I used to ask my superiors, from time to time, whether it would not perhaps be better if aeroplanes had feathers; but I seldom succeeded in extracting a rational or even a patient answer to this question.

But, after all, why do birds have feathers? Given the job of designing a flying animal, a modern engineer would perhaps produce something like a bat, or possibly some sort of flying insect. I do not think that it would occur to him to invent feathers. Yet presumably there are very good reasons for their existence. One imagines that both bats and pterodactyls tend to lose a good deal of energy in the form of heat from the skin of their wings; but then reasonable heat insulation could be provided by fur.

Perhaps this is what did happen at an early stage in the evolution of birds, because feathers, like horns and claws, developed from hair. However, hair is presumably better when it is soft, and so the keratin from which hair is made has quite a low Young's modulus. In feathers the keratin molecule has been made stiffer by cross-linking the molecular chains with sulphur atoms (which accounts for the smell of burnt feathers).

There are, no doubt, aerodynamic advantages in using feathers, since their employment extends the choice of outside shapes which the animal can make use of. For one thing, ‘thick' wing-sections have often better aerodynamic efficiencies than the thin ones which result from membranes. It is easy to get an efficient ‘thick' section by padding out the wing profile with feathers at the cost of very little weight increase. Furthermore, feathers are better adapted than skin and bone for providing anti-stalling devices such as' slots' and' flaps'.

However, I am inclined to think that the main advantage of feathers to an animal may be structural. Anybody who has flown model aeroplanes knows, to their cost, how vulnerable any small flying machine must be to accidental damage from things like trees and bushes, or even from careless handling. Many birds fly constantly in and out of trees and hedges and other obstacles. Indeed they use such cover as a refuge from their enemies. For most birds the loss of a reasonable number of feathers is not a very serious matter. Besides, it is better to leave the cat with a mouthful of feathers than to be eaten.

Feathers not only enable birds to get away with more local scrapes and abrasions than other animals, but the body of the bird is protected from more serious damage by its thick resilient armour. The Japanese feather armour which one sees in museums was not, as one might suppose, the picturesque nonsense of a primitive people who did not know any better. It was an effective protection against weapons like swords. In the same kind of way, during the Russo-Finnish war, Finnish armoured trains were protected by bales of paper; and modern fighter-pilots' splinter-proof boots are made from many layers of Cellophane. When a hawk kills a bird in the air it does not usually do so by wounding it with its beak or talons – which would probably not penetrate the feathers. It kills by striking the bird in the back with its outstretched feet so as to impart a violent acceleration to the bird as a whole which has the effect of breaking its neck – very much as happens in judicial hanging.

The whole constitution and design of feathers seem to be extremely cunning. Feathers probably do not need to be especially strong, but they do need to be stiff and at the same time resilient and to have a high work of fracture. The work of fracture mechanism of feathers is something of a mystery; at the time of writing I do not think anybody knows how it works. Like so many work of fracture mechanisms, that of feathers is sensitive to what appear to be small changes. Everybody who has kept and flown hawks knows that these intelligent, exacting and maddening birds lpse condition very easily. Even when they are properly fed and exercised in captivity, hawks' feathers are very apt to become brittle and break off with undue frequency. The cure or palliative for this is to join the broken parts of the feather together again by ‘imping*. This is done by inserting a double-ended ‘imping-needle', with a little glue, inside the hollow of the shaft at the break. The details of this process are described in the sixteenth-century books on hawking.

When one considers the appalling and expensive frequency with which motor cars nowadays incur bumps, bashes and abrasions, one sometimes wonders whether they have not a lesson to learn from the birds. Incidentally, I am told that, since the American army practically lives on chicken, there exist somewhere in the United States enormous quantities of unwanted chicken feathers. It would be rather nice to find a use for them.

* * *

*The muscular mechanism has recently been understood. It works by feeding energy into edge dislocations which operate, as it were, in reverse. For edge dislocations see The New Science of Strong Materials, Chapter 4.

*The number of vibrations per second (i.e. the frequency), n, of a stretched string can be written:

where l = length of string

p = density of material from which string is made (kg/m3)

s = tensile stress in string (N/m2).

* But then, during the same period, eighty-three steamboats were destroyed by fire, eighty-eight by running into sunken trees, and seventy from ‘other causes'. It seems that Life on the Mississippi, in the showboat days, was not uneventful.

† A partial solution was provided by Mariotte around 1680, but of course he was unable to make use of the concept of stress.

Chapter 7 Joints, fastenings and people

-also about creep and chariot wheels

And here I want to tell you a story about a ship that was madeduring the war. She wasa steamer, and she was built of wood – good wood; and the men who designed her were good and able craftsmen too...

She went along like a man who carries too heavy a burden, and presently she tripped and stumbled (it was only a little ground-swell) – and she opened out and fell apart like a flimsy old crate that someone had stepped on. In five minutes there was nothing there at all except a floating scum of coal dust, with some timbers and an odd man or two bobbing about in the middle of it.

This is a true story; but the point I want you to notice is that this ship was made by carpenters: house carpenters – shore carpenters; and she was not built by shipwrights at all.

