1 Kings 7.1-3 (New English Bible)

A solid roof over one's head is one of the prime requirements of a civilized existence, but permanent roofs are heavy and the problem of supporting them is really as old as civilization itself. When one looks at a famous and beautiful building – or indeed at any building – it is illuminating to bear in mind that the way in which the architect has chosen to solve his roofing problem has affected not only the appearance of the roof itself, but also the design of the walls and the windows and indeed the whole character of the building.

In fact, the problem of supporting a roof is essentially similar in its nature to the problem of making a bridge, with the difference that, since the walls of buildings are likely to be thinner and weaker than the piers of bridges, any sideways thrust which the roof may impose must be considered even more carefully. As we saw in Chapter 9, if the roof pushes outwards too hard upon the tops of the walls on which it rests, the line of the thrust in the masonry will be displaced to a dangerous extent and the walls will collapse.

Many Roman buildings and practically all Byzantine formal architecture made use of vaulted or domed roofs. These arch-like structures thrust vigorously outwards upon their supports, and in most cases this was catered for by resting the roofs upon very thick walls within which the thrust line had generally plenty of room to wander about in safety. As we have seen, these thick walls were often made from mass concrete, sometimes lightened and thickened by the incorporation of empty wine jars. Such walls were structurally stable, and they had the additional advantage of providing excellent heat insulation in hot climates: a Byzantine church is often the only cool place in a Greek village. However, it is not easy to make windows in very thick walls, and such windows as existed in Roman and Byzantine buildings were usually small and placed high up.

The medieval castles were built pretty much in the Roman tradition, frequently, as at Corfe Castle, from mass concrete many yards thick. Such walls were well able to resist the thrusts set up by the vaulted roofs; and, for military reasons, the defenders did not really want windows anyway. The earlier Norman or ‘Romanesque' churches were not very different, and their thick walls, little, rounded arches and small windows derive directly from late Roman prototypes. Most of the early Romanesque churches were satisfactory enough, and many of them survive today.* The difficulties and complications arose later on and are to a great extent associated with the growing fashion for bigger and better windows.

Understandably, people living in sun-drenched countries do not feel quite the same about windows as northerners, and even today many of them seem to dwell, apparently from choice, in a perpetual shuttered twilight. No doubt this is all part of a long Mediterranean tradition, for in Greek and Roman and Byzantine times such windows as existed were generally small and rather ineffectual.† As far as one can see, this was by no means entirely due to a shortage of glass.

In northern Europe, even warlike knights and barons did not want to spend all their time in gloomy and nearly windowless castles. What they wanted was light and sunshine, and so they tired of architectural forms based upon dark Roman models. The cult of windows became an obsession, and, as time went on, builders competed in constructing both halls and churches with larger and larger and ever more splendid windows. The medieval craftsmen may have been hopelessly unscientific but they were sometimes much more creative than we generally recognize. In particular we owe them a great debt for showing us what beautiful and exciting things can be done with windows.

However, much of the effect of an impressive and expensive window is lost if it has to be inserted into a tunnel-like opening in a thick wall. Inevitably, attempts to provide bigger windows set in thinner walls ran into trouble with thrust lines. Norman architecture was basically Roman architecture and cannot be made to do this sort of thing, because it depends for its stability and safety on the use of thick walls. But this did not stop builders from trying, and it has been said of late Romanesque architecture that the question to ask of any particular building is ‘not whether, but when, the Great Tower fell'.

Figure 1. King's College Chapel, Cambridge.

Just how clearly the medieval masons appreciated what was happening is not certain. Most probably their understanding of the situation was muddled and subjective; otherwise they would not have gone on making the same mistakes for several generations. Sooner or later, however, somebody realized that the way to deal with a demand for large windows and thin walls was to make use of buttresses, which could prop the wall against the outward thrust of the roof by pushing against it from outside.* Effectively, buttresses make the wall thicker, and so they do the same job as the Roman wine bottles, only in a different way.

Figure 2. The introduction of side aisles and a clerestory required the invention of the flying buttress.

The ordinary solid buttress is really no more than a local thickening of the wall between the windows. Where there is only a single aisle, as in King's College Chapel (Figure 1 and Plate 13), it is very effective. Difficulties arose, however, with side aisles. In order to prop the roof of the nave without unduly shading the clerestory windows, the Gothic masons had to invent the flying buttress (Figure 2). In this case the vertical part of the buttress is separated from the wall by a series of arches, which transmit the thrust without intercepting much of the light.

The decorative possibilities of flying buttresses in conjunction with large windows are very great, and, as we have said, they are still further enhanced by the judicious introduction of statues and pinnacles, whose weight, as the masons must somehow have realized, helps the buttresses in the tricky task of guiding the thrust lines safely down through the lace-like forest of masonry. In the end the windows became so large that not very much actual solid wall was left to support the building. Like a modern mast, these narrow strips of stonework depended entirely upon lateral support. As a tall thin mast relies upon a network of sophisticated rigging, so these slender walls depend entirely for their stability upon the bracing afforded by arches and buttresses.

By whatever mental process all this was accomplished, the structural and artistic achievement was immense. By the time the master masons had created the Gothic buildings of the high Middle Ages, architecture had lost any visible connection with its classical origins. Few things could look much more different than, say, Canterbury Cathedral and a Roman basilica. Yet the line of descent is clear and simple.

Although buildings like these are often very beautiful, they are always horribly expensive, and in any case arched or domed roofs are usually unsuitable for private houses. Rather than using arches it is much cheaper and simpler to support the roof of a building by using beams of one sort or another. If the spaces to be covered are spanned with long poles or joists, then such beams can transmit the weight of the roof from their ends, vertically downwards into the masonry of the walls, without any need to push sideways and outwards. Thus no unwelcome disturbance is caused to the thrust line and so the walls can be made quite thin and will not need buttressing (Figure 3).

Figure 3. Simply supported roof-truss. This one is shown mounted on rollers to emphasize that there need be no outward thrust upon the supporting walls.

For this reason alone, the beam is one of the most important devices in the whole of structural engineering. In fact, however, the applications of the beam – and of its equivalent, the truss -extend far beyond the roofing of buildings; and beams and beam theory have played a very important part indeed in making technological civilization possible. Similar ideas are also continually cropping up in biology.

The word ‘beam' means a tree in Old English, and this usage still survives in tree names like ‘whitebeam' and ‘hornbeam'. Although nowadays beams are very commonly made from steel or reinforced concrete, for a great many years a ‘beam', in the structural sense, implied a baulk of timber, very often a whole tree-trunk. Although it is cheaper and much less trouble to cut down a tree than to build a masonry arch or vault, the supply of suitable large trees is not unlimited and a time arrives when long pieces of timber become scarce. When this happens one may be forced to try to construct roofs from short lengths of material.

Roof trusses

To the modern mind it might seem fairly clear that the most promising way to try to bridge a roof-span using short pieces of timber would be to join the short members together, Meccano-fashion, so as to make a triangulated structure, something like Figure 4. This is really the beginning of a lattice girder. We are all familiar with lattice girders in steel railway bridges. Any triangulated lattice structure of this kind is called a ‘truss'. Like a long solid beam, when a roof-truss is properly designed it allows considerable spans to be roofed economically and without putting any dangerous outward thrusts upon the supporting walls. As with beams and beam theory, the applications of trussing in modern technology are far wider than this and extend to ships and bridges and aeroplanes and to all manner of other structural devices. As we have seen in the last chapter, the tied arch is really another example of the same idea.

Figure 4. If long pieces of timber cannot be got, then a roof-truss could be built up, Meccano-fashion, from short pieces.

However, in the history of architecture the concept of the truss or lattice beam was surprisingly slow in developing. The most primitive form of this idea, the ordinary wooden roof-truss, may seem obvious to us but it took our ancestors a long, long time to think of it. But then they had never seen a railway bridge or played with Meccano. As it turned out, architectural trussing was a late Roman invention, although it never really caught on properly until the Middle Ages. During most of antiquity architects just managed without trusses.

Greek builders never thought of trusses at all. Vastly eminent Athenian architects, such as Mnesicles, who built the Propylaea, and Ictinus, who designed the Parthenon and the Temple of Apollo at Bassae, consciously rejected arches and vaults as a method of roofing their buildings, and yet they failed conspicuously to invent the roof-truss or to devise any really adequate substitute for it. The brilliance of Hellenic architecture seems to come to a stop, rather suddenly, when one gets to the architrave. Greek roofs can only be described as intellectually squalid.

Figure 5. Roof of an archaic Greek temple.

Simple stone beams or lintels cannot safely be used to span distances of more than about eight feet (2-5 metres); otherwise they are liable to crack. Therefore, in order to provide practicable roofs for temples and other buildings, it was necessary to use wooden beams, in spite of the fact that in classical Greece timber had become nearly as scarce as it is in modern Greece.

In Greek temples for which the necessary number of full-span wooden roof-beams could be found, the beams were simply laid horizontally right across the tops of the walls and of the stone lintels of the peristyle. These beams or joists were then boarded over so as to provide a continuous flat ceiling over the whole area of the building (Figure 5). Naturally this flat ceiling, which was only made from ordinary planks, was anything but weatherproof. So a great mound of clay soil, mixed with water and straw, was heaped up on top of it. For an average-sized temple this pile of clay must have weighed something like 3,000 tons. When they had got all this agricultural material up there and tamped it down properly, the mound was trimmed off as accurately as might be to the triangular shape of a pitched or sloping roof. After this the roofing tiles were brought up and simply laid directly on top of the clay, very much like laying paving stones for a garden path. Presumably one hoped that this great mass of wet clay would dry out before the wooden ceiling which supported it began to rot. When dry, it must have made a wonderful sanctuary for vermin; but the excellent thermal insulation would, no doubt, have been welcome in hot weather.

Frequently, of course, it was necessary to use beams or rafters of shorter length. King Solomon had made special political arrangements* with King Hiram for the supply of cedar from the Lebanon, but even so his roof-beams were only about 25 feet long (7 metres or 17 cubits). Many Greek temple beams were shorter than this. In the Greek temples, as in Solomon's building, these short rafters were supported directly from underneath, by rows of pillars, regardless of architectural convenience. In one of the great Doric temples (c. 550 B.C.) at Paestum in southern Italy, there is a line of columns right down the middle of the nave, dividing it into two equal aisles. This must have made any kind of religious ceremony very awkward. In most of the later temples more seemly and more symmetrical arrangements were generally achieved (Figure 6), but even the interior of the Parthenon was cluttered up with pillars which we should think unnecessary.

The simplest form of roof-truss, which was an ‘A'-shaped affair, was developed during the Middle Ages. The horizontal tension member or tie-bar across the bottom of the truss is called by builders the ‘collar'. For short spans it was generally easy enough to find timbers for the collar which were sufficiently long to make a simple triangular truss like Figure 7, but for a small two-storied house this arrangement often results in rather clumsy architectural proportions; moreover, a good deal of spacemay be wasted in the roof. For these reasons builders often attached the collar higher up – in effect putting the upstairs rooms partially within the roof and using dormer windows where necessary. This is all very well, but, if the collar is put high up on the truss, there is a tendency for the rafters to bend or spring outwards under the weight of the roof. This pushes the wall outwards at the same time (Figure 8), very possibly with expensive results. Naturally, the higher the collar is placed, the worse the effect is likely to be.

Figure 6. The more sophisticated temples of the fifth century managed to support their roofs without the use of trusses.

Figure 7. Simple two-storey house with the collar of the roof-truss level with the tops of the walls.

Figure 8. The effect of raising the collar too high in order to save space and cost. (Exaggerated – but not much.)

In large medieval halls and churches, which were often of considerable span, roofing was a serious problem. A trussed roof might be cheaper than an arched or vaulted masonry one, but, even if timbers long enough to make full-length tie-bars or collars could be found, the presence of these collars comparatively low down in the building spoilt the architectural effect of the nave or hall, and, in particular, they blocked the view of the great east and west windows. Since people in those days were often so backward as to pay more attention to appearances than to ‘efficiency', Continental builders stuck to masonry vaulting, supporting their arched roofs by means of elaborate and expensive buttressing.

Figure 9. Simple hammer-beam roof. The effect is to move the point of application of the outward thrust (which results from the distortion of the truss) further down the walls so that it has less effect on the thrust line. At the same time the view of the end window is kept clear.

Characteristically, the English builders produced a compromise or palliative type of timber roof, which has been described as ‘more ingenious than scientific'. This was the ‘hammer-beam' roof (Figure 9). Hammer-beam roofs became comparatively popular for large buildings in England, and they can be seen in Westminster Hall, in many Oxbridge colleges and in some large private houses today. They are much admired by the artistic, perhaps partly because of the opportunities which the ‘knuckles' of the trusses afforded to imaginative wood-carvers. Dorothy Sayers addicts will remember the adventures of Lord Peter Wimsey among the angels and cherubim carved upon the hammer-beams in the church of Fenchurch St Paul.*

In structural terms the main effect of a hammer-beam truss, as compared with any similar large truss with a high collar, is to shift the point of application of the outward thrust further down the supporting walls, so that its effect upon the all-important thrust line is less disastrous. Although this has worked well in practice, the hammer-beam truss has never appealed to the logical Continental mind and there are few examples of it outside this country.

In traditional wooden roof-trusses the joints were made by means of wooden pegs, or sometimes with iron straps. Although these joints were not particularly efficient, the main requirement in such structures was for stiffness rather than strength, and so weak joints did not matter very much. In large modern buildings, such as factories and sheds and barns, roof-trusses are often made up from steel sections such as angle-bars, in which case no particular problems may arise. In small modern houses, however, the roof-truss is nearly always of wood, and the thickness of the timbers has often been cut to the minimum – or even beyond it. The ceiling-joists, in particular, may be barely stiff enough to support the ceiling without causing the plaster to crack. If we are tempted to indulge in the fashionable activity of turning a modern attic into an extra bedroom, the most serious problem is likely to be the stiffness of the floor. Although the roof-truss is unlikely to break, the deflections caused by the extra weight of people and furniture may well cause serious and expensive damage to the house. Amateur handymen, please take note.

Trusses in shipbuilding

There is a land of sailing ships,

a land beyond the rivers of Cush

which sends its envoys by the Nile,

journeying on the waters in vessels of reed.

Isaiah 18.1-2 (c. 740 B.C.; New English Bible)

As a matter of fact, trusses of various kinds were used and understood by shipwrights for many centuries before builders and shore-going architects got round to the idea. Most histories of shipbuilding begin with the boats which the Ancient Egyptians made for use on the Nile. As the prophet Isaiah seems to have been well aware, these boats were constructed by tying together several parallel bundles of reeds. Actually, these reed boats, which developed from rafts, date back to long before the time of Isaiah, probably to somewhere between 4,000 and 3,000 B.C. Similar boats are in use today on the White Nile and also on Lake Titicaca, in South America. Since the bundles of reeds naturally tapered towards the ends, a roughly boat-shaped form was achieved more or less automatically. Often the long, wispy, ends of the reed bundles were tied in such a way that they turned upwards so as to provide a vertical decoration at the bow and stern. This feature survives today, sometimes not very much changed in shape, in the high stemposts of Mediterranean rowing boats -especially in the Venetian gondola and the Maltese dghaisa.

Although most of the buoyancy of a ship is provided by the middle part of the hull and comparatively little by the tapering ends, nothing will ever prevent people from putting heavy weights into the ends of a ship. One result of this is that many vessels tend to ‘hog' (the two ends tend to droop and the middle of the hull tends to rise). This state of affairs is the opposite of that which exists in roofs and bridges, where the middle of the truss is usually trying to sag below the level of the end-supports. This condition is called ‘sagging' by engineers. Although in hogging and sagging the forces and deflections are acting in opposite directions, it is clear that in both cases the beam or truss is being bent and that precisely analogous principles and arguments apply.

Structurally speaking, a ship's hull is a sort of beam, and the effect of the hogging forces on the flexible reed hulls of the Egyptian boats must have been very obvious. A hogged ship is a depressing thing to look at, and this state of affairs needs to be prevented for all sorts of other excellent reasons, so that it was necessary to do something about the situation even in 3,000 B.C. In fact the Egyptians tackled the problem extremely sensibly. They provided their ships with what is now called a ‘hogging-truss'. This consisted of a stout rope which was passed over the tops of a series of vertical struts, its two ends being looped under and round the ends of the ship, so as to prevent them from drooping (Figure 10) This rope could be tightened by some form of ‘Spanish windlass'. The latter device is a skein of cords which can be twisted – and so shortened – by means of a long stick or lever thrust through its middle. Thus the big reed hull could be strained to any degree of straightness or vertical curvature which the skipper happened to fancy. As the art of shipbuilding progressed, the Egyptians came to construct their hulls from timber, rather than from bundles of reeds. But, since most of the planks were very short and nearly all of the fastenings might be described as wobbly, the need for the hogging-truss remained.

Figure 10. Egyptian sea-going vessel, c. 2,500 B.C. This one is built of wood but retains the vertical ornaments at stem and stern characteristic of reed-built boats. The wooden planks are very short and badly fastened, hence this ship also retains the traditional Egyptian hogging-truss. Note the A-shaped mast.

Greek shipwrights were more advanced than the Egyptian ones and they built the splendid triremes or fighting galleys upon which the sea-power of Athens depended. However, these ships were also built from short lengths of timber, and their light hulls were very flexible and much inclined to leak. For these reasons the Greeks retained the hogging-truss in the sophisticated form which was called the hupozoma. This was a substantial rope which ran right round outside the hull, high up and just beneath the gunwale. Again the hupozoma was set up by means of a Spanish windlass which could be adjusted as needed by the helmsman. Since Greek warships fought mainly by ramming each other, they had to be able to withstand a great deal of structural abuse. The hupozoma was therefore an essential part of the hulls of these ships; they were unable to fight, or even to go to sea at all, without it. Just as it used to be the practice to disarm modern warships by removing the breech-blocks from the guns, so, in classical times, disarmament commissioners used to disarm triremes by removing the hupozomata.

It is quite clear that the Athenian shipbuilders, down in the Piraeus, were familiar with the principles of trussing, and one might well ask why the Athenian architects, such as Mnesicles and Ictinus, did not latch on to the idea for the roofs of their temples. Perhaps the analogy between hogging and sagging never struck them, or perhaps they just never hobnobbed with shipwrights. After all, how many house architects today ever talk to a naval architect?

When the fragile oared fighting galley went out of use, hogging-trusses disappeared. However, the American river steamboats of the nineteenth century were every bit as flexible as the Greek trireme or the Egyptian vessels on the Nile. Their shallow wooden hulls presented exactly the same problems, and the Americans solved these problems in precisely the same way as the ancient Egyptians did. All the American river steamers were provided with hogging-trusses of the Egyptian pattern. The only difference was that the tension members were made from iron rods, rather than papyrus rope, and they were tightened by means of metal screws instead of a Spanish windlass. Racing skippers claimed to be able to squeeze an extra half knot out of their steamboats by adjusting the shape of the hull by screwing or unscrewing the hogging-truss. The fact that the hulls of these steamers leaked, in consequence, even worse than the hulls of the triremes did not matter very much because they were provided with steam bilgepumps.

Trusses also occur, of course, in many different forms in connection with the rigs of almost every kind of sailing ship. Very probably, the sail is another Egyptian invention, for on the Nile the wind blows upstream for most of the year, so that cargo vessels can sail up the river with a fair wind and drift back downstream with the current – as they still do today.

The first problem in constructing a sailing ship is to erect some kind of mast upon which sail can be hoisted. The second, and much more difficult, problem is to keep that mast in place. Broadly speaking, the masts of conventional sailing ships are, structurally, simple poles or struts which are supported from a sufficient number of directions by the system of fixed ropes which seamen call ‘standing rigging': that is to say, by ‘shrouds' and ‘stays'. If one has a hull which is rigid enough to withstand the pull of the shrouds and stays, this is nearly always the best arrangement, and (as we shall see in Chapter 14) it can be shown mathematically to minimize the weight and cost. However, the Egyptians had not done this sort of mathematics, and, furthermore, they had no preconceived ideas about the subject. All they knew was that they were rather tired of rowing and they wanted to find some way of supporting a new-fangled thing called a sail above a hull which was made from reeds.

Having spent a good deal of time in developing sailing rigs for the pneumatic rescue dinghies which were carried by bomber aircraft,* I can sympathize with the ancient Egyptians about this business of masts. The blown-up hulls of the pneumatic dinghies were probably just about as flexible as the Egyptian reed boats. One cannot really expect to be able to attach highly-loaded ropes to a thing like a soggy balloon or to a floppy bundle of reeds, and in these circumstances the whole idea of ‘standing rigging' becomes rather laughable. Very sensibly, therefore, the Egyptians merely planted a sort of tripod, or sometimes an ‘A ‘-shaped truss, on top of the rather squidgy hull (Figure 10). This affair worked perfectly well on the Nile; I used to envy the ancient Egyptians their solution to the problem, which, unfortunately, was never practicable with the rescue dinghies. The Egyptians did not have to arrange for the whole of their sailing rig to be folded up and packed inside a small bag, which, in turn, had to be stowed in a crowded aircraft.

The hulls of Greek and Roman merchant ships were generally sufficiently strong and stiff」to resist the loads imposed on them by conventional standing rigging, and so these vessels had their masts stepped in the middle of the ship and supported by shrouds and stays in the usual way. For some reason, however, even large Roman ships seldom got much beyond the stage of a single mast, carrying one large square sail, set from one long yard. It was not until the great expansion of sea voyaging at the time of the Renaissance that the rig of large sailing ships was elaborated by multiplying the number of masts and sails. About this time the single mast was replaced by three, called the fore, main and mizzen masts. Eventually, each of these masts was extended upwards so as to be able to carry, above the lower square sails or ‘courses', first, square topsails, then topgallants, and finally royals. (The even loftier skysails and moonsails came much later, an affectation of the clipper era.)

Traditionally each sail – course, topsail, topgallant and royal -is set from its own separate section of mast. That is to say, each lower mast is surmounted by a topmast, each topmast in turn by a topgallant mast and so on. Each of these upper masts constitutes a separate piece of timber, and each is supported in its proper position by means of elaborate and sophisticated sliding fittings. These were arranged so that all the upper masts and yards could, on occasion, be lowered and sent down on deck. Since the larger spars each weighed several tons, it needed both skill and nerve to raise and lower such unwieldy objects in a rolling ship. However, a big warship would have a crew of 800 men, most of whom could have put both steeplejacks and trained athletes to shame. The sail-drill in the Mediterranean fleet in the 1840s has become legendary. It is alleged that, when the admiral had finished his breakfast, he was apt to signal ‘All ships will strike topmasts. Report time taken and number of casualties'. However this may be, it is certain that crack battleships like H.M.S. Marlborough could be stripped to their lower masts by their own crews in a matter of minutes and re-rigged as quickly. These competitive exercises were by no means a waste of effort. Ships carried ample supplies of spare spars, and the safety of a ship in an emergency, or the outcome of an action in time of war, had repeatedly depended upon how quickly crippled masts could be replaced. A limited number of casualties during peace-time drills had to be accepted, as we accept accidents in riding or rock-climbing.

The structural technology behind all this was superb of its kind, and it is worthy of the attention of modern engineers, who are apt to be rather snooty about it. The complexity of the rigging which was needed to support all the tophamper in the later sailing ships can best be appreciated by going to look at the Victory (Plate 14) or the Cutty Sark. The total height of Victory's mainmast, for instance, is about 223 feet (67 metres). The length of her main-yard is 102 feet (30 metres), but this can be extended at will to a total width of 197 feet (59 metres) by means of sliding stunsail booms. All this immense mechanism worked, and worked reliably, for years on end and in spite of the most appalling conditions of wind and sea, being much more reliable than most modern machinery.

The masts of big sailing ships represent perhaps the most elaborate and certainly one of the most beautiful systems of trussing which has ever been developed. At the cost of considerable complexity, the total weight of structure up aloft was kept down to a safe figure. However, when big guns, mounted in revolving turrets, had to be introduced into sailing battleships around 1870, the network of shrouds and other ropes was found to restrict unduly the arcs of fire of the guns. For this reason certain ironclads, notably H.M.S. Captain, were fitted with tripod masts which could be arranged so as to permit a better field of fire. This was a reversion to the Egyptian method of masting, if you like. However, the extra top-weight (if these tripod structures had a bad effect upon the already precarious stability of these ships. This top-weight undoubtedly contributed to the capsizing of the Captain, under sail, one dirty night in the Bay of Biscay. Nearly five hundred men were drowned.

Cantilevers and ‘simply supported' beams

It is evident that, functionally, it does not make much difference whether a ‘ beam' is in the form of a long continuous piece of material – a solid tree-trunk or a steel rod or tube or joist – or whether it takes the shape of some kind of open-work truss. This latter might be a wooden roof-truss, a sea-going arrangement of ropes and spars, or some modern Meccano-like lattice, such as a bridge or an electricity pylon. As we shall see, there are plenty of both kinds of beams in animals as well. The fact that bridges and roof-trusses and horses' backs and dachshunds are usually more or less horizontal, while ships' masts and telegraph poles and pylons and ostriches' necks are quite often vertical, does not make much difference. The essential purpose of all these structures is the same: that is to say, a load which acts at right angles to the length of the beam is supported without putting any longitudinal force upon whatever is supporting the beam. This is essentially what all beams are for.

It might be thought that a thing like a ship's mast was an exception to this, because a mast thrusts downwards, forcibly, upon the hull of a ship. But then the shrouds and stays pull upwards on the hull just as much, and so there is no net vertical force upon the hull, which does not rise or sink in the water in consequence. Similar arguments apply with many animal structures. A horse's neck, for instance, is very much like a mast. The vertebrae, like the mast, are in compression and push backwards on the horse's body, but they are stayed, like the mast, by the neck tendons, which pull forwards on the body with an equal and opposite force.

In the sense which we have just been discussing, all beams, living or dead, do the same job; yet beams as a whole tend to fall into two main categories: ‘cantilevers' and ‘simply supported* beams. There are in fact further variants and sub-divisions, which are frequently useful for examination and other purposes, but we shall ignore them for the moment.

Figure 11. A cantilever beam with distributed load.

A ‘cantilever' is a beam one end of which can be considered as being' built in ‘to some rigid support, such as a wall or the ground. This end-condition is called by engineers encastre – which is merely French for ‘built in'. The other end of the cantilever, of course, sticks out and supports the load. Electricity pylons, telegraph poles, ships' masts, turbine blades, horns, teeth, animals' necks and trees and cornstalks and dandelions are cantilevers, and so are the wings of birds and aeroplanes and butterflies and also the tails of mice and peacocks.

Figure 12. Simply supported beam.

A simply supported beam (Figure 12) is one which rests freely on supports at both ends.

Structurally, the two cases are closely connected. From Figure 13 we can see that a simply supported beam is simply equivalent to two cantilevers, back to back and turned upside down.

Figure 13. A simply supported beam may be considered as two cantilevers back to back and upside down.

Bridge trusses

The road is carried across valleys hundreds of feet in depth on rude trestle bridges, which creak and groan beneath the weight of the train. Anything apparently more insecure than these structures can hardly be found else-where, and I always drew a long breath of relief as I found my self safely on the other side. It is a fearful thing to look out of the carriage windows into the dizzy depth below, and feel that if the frail fabric were to collapse, as it seemed on the point of doing, we should all be dashed to pieces with no possibility of escape. Even in the Eastern States many of these primitive bridges yet remain, and it is said that few accidents have happened from their use. They are, however, very liable to destruction from fire, caused by burning coals falling from the engine.

Rev Samuel Manning, LL.D., American Pictures (1875)

The English railways were built straight and level across the rolling English landscape by the lavish use of cuttings and embankments and splendid viaducts of masonry and ironwork. All this engineering luxury depended upon supplies of capital and labour, both of which were plentiful in Victorian England. Conditions in America were totally different.* The distances were enormous; capital was scarce; the wages, even of unskilled men, were high. In the Land of the Free, where every man was an amateur, skilled craftsmen of the European type scarcely existed. Iron was expensive, but there was unlimited cheap timber. Above all, the American railroad engineers, like their steamboat colleagues, were prepared to take risks with other people's lives and property which made the hair of British engineers rise up under their stove-pipe hats. Yet these British engineers were certainly not unduly cautious men; nowadays we should consider them rash. Nineteenth-century Americans, of course, were in the habit of living dangerously – but this was more on account of their engineers than of the Red Indians or the bandits.

The railroads were pushed westwards as fast as they could be built and with a minimum of expensive cuttings and embankments. When conditions were suitable, the valleys were bridged by means of those enormous timber trestle viaducts which alarmed the Rev. Dr Manning. They will always be associated, in tradition, with the American railways; a fair number of them survive today (Plate 15). Once they had been constructed, the American railways were vastly profitable – the Central Pacific Railroad is said to have paid dividends of 60 per cent – and so they were soon able to convert many of their precarious trestle bridges to solid earth embankments by tipping soil from the top from specially constructed trains until the whole wooden structure was encased in earth and could be left to rot away.

Wide and rolling rivers could not be crossed by the trestle viaducts and so there was a need for large, long-span bridges. Permanent bridges of the European type were often impracticable for lack of money and skilled labour, and so there was a very active requirement for long – and cheap -.wooden trusses, which could be made by ordinary joiners. Since the construction of these trusses was potentially profitable and since the Americans are an incurably inventive people, a very considerable number of nineteenth-century Americans seem to have spent their time in inventing trusses. There are therefore to be found in the textbooks a very considerable number of designs for bridge trusses, each slightly different, and each called after the name of its inventor. We need not go through them all in detail, for they all work upon somewhat similar principles, but two or three types are worth mentioning.

One of the earliest of these was the Bollman truss (Figure 14), which was very extensively used in America – perhaps more on account of Bollman's political talents than his technical ones. He somehow managed to persuade the American government that his was the only ‘safe ‘design of truss, and at one time its use was made compulsory. This may not have been quite so difficult a legislative feat as one might suppose, since it came to be accepted for many years as a practical working principle, by professional engineers, that the technical ignorance of the American Congressman could safely be regarded as bottomless.*

Figure 14. Bollman truss.

Figure 14 shows a simplified Bollman truss with only three panels. In practice there were usually a great many more, and the whole thing tended to get complicated. Besides this the tension members were unnecessarily long. The Fink truss (Figure 15) does the same job as the Bollman truss, but does it rather better, using shorter members.

Figure 15. Fink truss.

We can, with benefit, put a continuous member along the bottom of the Fink truss and turn it into what is more or less a Pratt or Howe truss (Figure 16).

This is pretty well what is generally used in the traditional biplane. It will be seen that the Pratt or the Howe truss will work equally well upside-down – that is to say, either in hogging or in sagging – provided that we take certain common-sense precautions. Furthermore, if we arrange that all the members can take both tension and compression, we can simplify the structure by turning it into a Warren girder (Figure 17). It is this form, or something like it, which is most commonly used for trusses made from ordinary steelwork.

Figure 16. Pratt or Howe truss.

So far, we have considered all these bridges as being simply supported beams, and so, of course, a great many of them were and are. However, a number of beam bridges are cantilever bridges. For some reason cantilever bridges were never very popular in wooden construction, but they are widely used nowadays when built from steel and concrete. A good proportion of the bridges over the motorways are reinforced concrete cantilever bridges. Such bridges generally have a centre-section which is a simply supported beam, resting on the extremities of two cantilevers (Figure 18). This is partly because it is easier to accommodate the deflections with this arrangement. However, there are a few bridges where the two cantilevers just stick out from each side and meet in the middle.

Figure 17. Warren girder.

In the days when very long railway bridges were being built it became fashionable to construct large steel cantilever bridges. The most famous example is the Forth railway bridge, which was completed in 1890. It was the first important bridge to be built from open-hearth steel,* and, in fact, contains 51,000 tons of it. However, road bridges generally do not need so much rigidity as railway bridges (the Forth bridge is said to be the only large bridge in the world over which trains are allowed to pass at full speed), and so most long modern bridges are suspension bridges, which are usually cheaper to build. The Forth road bridge, which has a similar total span to the railway bridge next door to it, and which was finished in 1965, contains only 22,000 tons of steel.

Figure 18. Cantilever bridge with simply supported beam for centre section.

Stress systems in trusses and beams

From all this it is clear that beams and trusses of various sorts and kinds play an immensely important part in sustaining the burdens of the world. What is rather less clear is just how they do it. How do the stresses work in a beam and what is it that really keeps the thing up? As we have said, lattice trusses and solid beams can nearly always be used interchangeably, and so, as one might suppose, the stress system within a truss is not very different in principle from that in a solid beam, although it has the advantage of being rather easier to visualize. Furthermore, cantilevers are perhaps easier to think about than simply supported beams, although as we have seen from Figure 13, the two conditions are quite simply related.

Let us consider therefore a truss in the form of a cantilever which is fixed to a wall (or encastre) at one end and which sticks out and supports a load W, for instance, from the other end. Let us begin, in fact, with the embryonic or nascent cantilever which is the simple triangular arrangement shown in Figure 19. In this affair the weight, W, is directly kept from falling down by the action of the upward component of the tension in the slanting member 1. The compressive force in the horizontal member 2 can only act horizontally, and so it can play no direct part in sustaining the weight. However, they also serve who only push horizontally, and member No. 2 is performing an indirect but very necessary function in keeping the truss extended, that is to say, sticking out in the way it does.

Figure 19.

Figure 20.

Let us now add an extra panel to the truss, as in Figure 20. It is clear that the weight is now sustained directly by the combined upward action of the tension in No. 1 and the compression in No. 3. No. 4 is necessarily in tension but, like No. 2 (which is still in compression), it does not contribute directly to sustaining the weight, although the truss cannot hold up without it.

If we build the truss up into several panels, as in Figure 21, the general situation remains very much the same. The diagonal members 1 and 5 are in tension and 3 and 7 are in compression. It is still these members which directly sustain the load. Taken together, these members are resisting what is called ‘shear'. We shall have a good deal more to say about shear in the next chapter. In the meantime we may observe that the force which is acting in all of these diagonal members is numerically similar. This remains true however long the cantilever may be and however many panels it has.

This is not true, however, of the horizontal forces. The compression in 2 is greater than in 6 and, in the same way, the tension in 4 is greater than the tension in 8. The longer we make the cantilever, the higher the compression will be in member No. 2 and the greater the tension in No. 4. If we make the cantilever very long, then the horizontal or longitudinal tension and compression forces and stresses close to the fixed end may be very high indeed. In other words, such a cantilever will probably break near its root, which after all is only common sense. However, we do have the apparent paradox that the forces are highest in members which do not contribute directly to supporting the load.

Figure 21.

In Figure 21 the downward load, or ‘shearing force', is directly supported, as we said, by the zig-zag of the diagonal members 1, 3, 5 and 7. However, there is nothing to prevent us from complicating this diagonal trellis by introducing more slanting members, which will all perform the same function. In fact this is often done for various reasons (Figure 22). This is just what Nature quite frequently does. The trunk and rib-cage of most vertebrates can be considered as a sort of simply supported beam. This is obvious in the case of a horse. The bones of the vertebrae and the ribs form the compression members of a rather elaborate Fink truss (Figures 15 and 23). The space between the ribs is criss-crossed by a web or network or trellis of muscular tissue which runs roughly at ±45° to the ribs.

Figure 22. The shear can equally well be taken by a multiple lattice or indeed by a continuous plate.

The next step in an engineering structure is to fill in the space in the middle of a truss, not with some kind of lattice, but with a continuous plate or ‘web' of some material like steel or plywood. This sort of beam can take many forms but probably the most familiar is the ordinary H or I beam (Figure 24). The function of the plate or web in the middle of the beam is just the same as that of the zig-zag trellis in a truss, and so the loads and stresses in the web run in much the same way.

Figure 23. Many vertebrate animals form a sort of Fink truss with muscles and tendons making a rather complicated diagonal shear bracing between the ribs.

Figure 24, In many engineering beams the shear is taken by a continuous plate web. But the tension and compression stresses due to shearing are still at ±45°.

Thus, in an H beam of this type, the ‘booms5 or ‘spars' or ‘flanges' at the top and bottom are there to resist horizontal or longitudinal tension and compression, while the *web\ in the middle, is chiefly there to resist the vertical or shearing forces.

Longitudinal bending stresses

As we have said, the longitudinal tension and compression stresses which act along the length of a beam are frequently higher and more dangerous than the shearing stresses, even though these longitudinal stresses do not themselves contribute directly towards supporting the load. In the ordinary beams which we are likely to meet in practice, it is very commonly the longitudinal stresses which are liable to cause failure, and so they are frequently the first stresses to be calculated by an engineer.

Although beams of H section (Figure 24) are common, a beam may be of any cross-sectional shape, and ordinary beam-theory calculations apply to beams of most simple shapes. In fact, the distribution of longitudinal stresses across the thickness of a beam is essentially similar to the distribution of stresses across the thickness of a masonry wall (Chapter 9), with the important difference that, whereas the masonry cannot take tensile stresses, the beam can.

Every beam must deflect under the load which is applied to it and it will therefore be distorted into a curved or bent shape. Material on the concave or compression face of a bent beam will be shortened or strained in compression. Material on the convex or tension face will be lengthened or strained in tension (Figure 25). If the material of the beam obeys Hooke's law the distribution of stress and strain across any section of the beam will be a straight line, and there will be some point ‘0' at which the longitudinal stress and strain is neither tensile nor compressive, but is zero. This point lies on what is called the ‘neutral axis' (N.A.) of the beam.

Figure 25. Distribution of stress through the thickness of a beam.

Since it is important to know the position of the neutral axis in a beam it is fortunate that this is easy to determine. It is quite simple to show, algebraically, that the neutral axis must always pass through the centroid or ‘centre of gravity' of the cross-section of the beam. For simple symmetrical sections, such as rectangles and circles and tubes and H beams, the neutral axis lies in the middle, half-way between the top and bottom of the beam. For non-symmetrical sections, such as railway lines and ships and aircraft wings, its position will have to be calculated -but this is not very difficult.

It is clear from Figure 25 that the longitudinal stress increases directly with the distance away from the neutral axis. This distance is generally called y when discussing beam theory.* Now if we are seeking structural ‘efficiency', whether in terms of weight of material, or cost, or metabolic energy, then we do not want to keep any cats that don't catch mice. In other words we do not want to have to provide material which carries little or no stress. This means that we want, as far as possible, to discard material which lies close to the neutral axis in favour of material as far away from it as possible. Of course, we shall need to leave some material near the neutral axis so as to carry the shearing stresses, but in practice we may not need much material for this purpose and quite a thin web may suffice (Figure 26).

Figure 26. Tension or compression stress due to bending at a point distant y from the neutral axis is s where

and M = bending moment

I = second moment of area of cross-section.

For how to arrive at M and I, see Appendix 2.

This is why, in engineering, steel beams usually have a cross-section of H or ‘channel' or Z form (Figure 24). These sections have the advantage of being relatively easy to make from mild steel in a rolling-mill. They are often known as ‘rolled steel joists' (R.S.J.s), and nowadays they can be bought in very large sizes. Z sections have the advantage over channels and Hs that it is easier to rivet the flanges to a plate. This is why Zs are often used for ships'ribs.

When simple sections of this sort are unsuitable it is quite common to use built-up ‘box' sections. The first and most important use of these was in Stephenson's Britannia bridge over the Menai Straits (1850; Plate 16 and Chapter 13, Figure 11, p. 291). Since the introduction of waterproof glues and reliable plywood, box beams are often used in wooden construction, particularly in the wing-spars of wooden gliders (Chapter 13, Figure 5, p. 279).

The same sort of arguments apply, of course, when we come to consider sheet materials. Thin sheet metal is weak and flexible in bending, and, to save weight, we want, if possible, to achieve a deeper section. This is often done by rolling corrugations into the metal sheet – with corrugated iron as the unfortunate result.* Corrugated metal sheet has been used in the past for the outside skins of both ships and aircraft, notably with the old Junkers monoplanes. However, the objections are obvious, and it is much more usual nowadays to stiffen and strengthen metal skins in shipbuilding and in aerospace by riveting or welding metal angles, called stringers, to the inside surfaces of the skin.

In all these situations the load commonly comes upon the beam from one direction only, and the shape of the cross-section is optimized with regard to this condition. In some engineering structures and in very many biological ones, however, the load may come from any direction. This is roughly true for lamp-posts, chair legs, bamboos and leg-bones. For such purposes it is better to use a round, hollow tube, and of course this is what is very often done. An intermediate case occurs with bermuda masts. These are generally made from tubes of oval or pear-shaped section. This is not primarily so as to reduce wind-drag by ‘streamlining', as is often supposed, but rather to cater for the fact that it is much easier to stay a modem mast laterally than it is in the fore and aft plane, and so the mast section has to take account of this by providing more strength and stiffness fore and aft.

* * *

* Of course, a great many small Norman churches have simple wooden roofs, but the design of these roofs is often such that they thrust outwards upon the walls nearly as badly as a stone vault.

† In Pompeii, where the windows are inadequate and the artificial light must have been bad, the walls of nearly all the rooms are painted either dark red or black. One wonders why.

*'I am not a Pillar, but a Buttress, of the Established Church, since I support it from without' (Lord Melbourne).

* 1 Kings 5 (where there is a strong hint that Solomon had to pay a stiff price).

*The Nine Tailors (Gollancz, 1934). But the roof-trusses of the little church of St Swithin at Wickham in Berkshire are decorated with large Victorian papier-mache elephants.

* For the benefit of any unfortunate airmen who may have had involuntary experience of these devices, I would explain that I would go about the job quite differently nowadays.

*The cost per mile of American railways was one fifth of that of English lines, although American wages were much higher.

* As late as 1912, during the American governmental inquiry into the loss of the liner Titanic, the following exchange was recorded:

Senator X.: You have told us that the ship was fitted with watertight compartments?

Expert witness: Yes.

Senator X.: Then will you explain how it was that the passengers were not able to get inside the watertight compartments when the ship sank?

* The New Science of Strong Materials, Chapter 10.

*See Appendix 2.

* Notice also the corrugations in clam-shells and in many kinds of leaves, such as hornbeam.

Chapter 12 The mysteries of shear and torsion

-or Polaris and the bias-cut nightie

Twist ye, twine ye! even so

Mingle shades of joy and woe, Hope and fear,

and peace and strife,

In the thread of human life.


第 11 章

一道梁的益处 —— 屋顶、桁架与桅杆

所罗门…… 营建黎巴嫩森林之宫，长一百肘，宽五十肘，高三十肘，建有四排香柏之柱，柱上置香柏木梁。梁上铺香柏为顶，支于柱上，每排十五根柱，共有横梁四十五根。

——《圣经·旧约全书·列王纪上》（1 Kings 7:1-3）

头顶上有稳固的屋顶是文明存续的基本要求之一，但永久性的屋顶很沉重，所以如何支撑它们的难题其实和文明本身一样古老。当看到一座著名又美丽的建筑物 —— 或者是任意一个建筑物 —— 时，牢记这一点是有启发意义的，建筑师为解决屋顶难题而选择的方法，不仅会影响屋顶本身的外观，还会影响墙壁、窗户甚至建筑物整体特征的设计。

事实上，支撑屋顶的难题在本质上与建造桥梁的问题类似，而不同之处在于，因为建筑物的墙壁很可能比桥墩更薄也更弱，所以我们对于屋顶可能施加的任意侧向推力务必慎之又慎。正如我们在第 9 章所见，如果屋顶施加在其所倚墙壁顶部的外推作用太猛，砖石结构内的推力作用线就会偏移到危险的程度，墙壁就会因此坍塌。

许多罗马屋宇和几乎所有拜占庭式建筑采用的都是拱顶或穹顶。这些拱状结构对它们的支撑物施加了很强的外推力，在大多数情况下这是通过将屋顶架在非常厚的墙壁上实现的，墙壁内的推力作用线通常有充分的安全游移空间。如我们所见，这些厚墙壁往往是由大块混凝土构成的，有时会加入空酒瓶来减重增厚。这样的墙壁结构稳定，它们还有额外的优点，即在炎热气候的条件下提供优良的隔热性能：拜占庭式教堂往往是一座希腊村庄里唯一凉爽的地方。但是，在很厚的墙壁上开窗户不是一件易事，这样的窗户在罗马和拜占庭式建筑物中一般很小并位于高处。

中世纪的城堡差不多都是按罗马传统建造的，比如科夫堡，用的就是数码厚的大块混凝土。这样的墙壁能很好地对抗拱顶施加的推力；出于军事上的考虑，防御方其实根本不想要窗户。早期的诺曼式或罗马式教堂没有什么区别，它们的厚墙壁、小圆拱和小窗户都源自晚期的罗马原型。大多数早期的罗马式教堂都十分令人满意，许多留存至今。[1] 后来出现的困难和复杂状况在很大程度上与更大更好的窗户的日益流行脱不了干系。

可以理解，在日照充足的地区生活的人对窗户的感受同北欧人不太一样，即使在今天，他们中的许多人似乎也明显愿意栖居于「暮光之城」。毫无疑问，这是地中海沿岸传统的一部分，在希腊、罗马和拜占庭时代，窗户一般小而无用。[2] 据我们所知，这并非完全归因于玻璃的短缺。

而在北欧，即使是尚武的骑士和贵族，也不愿把所有时间都花在几乎没有窗户的阴暗城堡里。他们渴望明亮与阳光，所以他们厌倦了源于阴暗的罗马原型的建筑样式。对窗户的狂热变成一种痴迷，随着时间的推移，建筑工匠竞相为厅堂和教堂打造出越来越大、越来越华丽的窗户。中世纪的工匠可能毫无科学章法，但他们有时比我们通常认为的更有创意，特别是他们向我们展示了窗户可以做得多么漂亮和激动人心。

然而，如果将一个令人赞叹、价格不菲的窗户镶嵌到一堵厚墙的隧道状孔洞中，那么它的大部分效果都会丧失。试图在较薄的墙壁里安装较大的窗户，则会不可避免地陷入推力作用线的麻烦。诺曼式建筑基本上就是罗马式建筑，不能用来做这类事情，因为其稳定性和安全性依赖于厚墙壁的使用。但这不会阻止建筑工匠的尝试，据说对于晚期的罗马式建筑，要问的问题不是「高塔是否会倒塌」，而是「何时会倒塌」。

我们尚不确定中世纪的石匠对这些真正了解多少。他们对于这种状况的理解很可能是糊涂而主观的，否则他们就不会一代代地犯同样的错误。但是，有人迟早会意识到，利用扶壁可以满足大窗户和薄墙壁的相关需求，它们可以从外部支撑住墙，使之能对抗屋顶的外推作用。[3] 实际上，扶壁让墙壁变得更厚，所以它们和罗马的酒瓶起着同样的作用，只不过方式不同。

普通的实心扶壁其实就是将窗户间的墙壁局部增厚。那里只有一个过道，就像国王学院礼拜堂（见图 11–1 和插图 13）一样，但它非常有效。然而，问题出在侧廊上。为了支撑教堂中殿的屋顶又不致过度遮蔽高侧窗，中世纪的石匠不得不发明飞扶壁（见图 11–2）。在这种情况下，扶壁的垂直部分靠一系列拱与墙壁分隔开，这些拱传递了推力，又不会阻挡大部分采光。

图 11–1 剑桥大学国王学院礼拜堂

与大窗匹配的飞扶壁用作装饰物的可能性非常大，如我们所说，它们的装饰性还会进一步增强，靠的是审慎而明智地引入雕像和尖顶，就像石匠必定以某种方式意识到的那样，雕像和尖顶的重量有助于扶壁完成棘手的任务，即引导推力作用线安全地向下穿过花边似的砖石丛林。最终，窗户变得很大，以至于没留下多余的实心墙来支撑建筑物。就像现代的桅杆一样，这些石制窄条完全依靠侧向支撑。如同高而细的桅杆依赖复杂而巧妙的索具网，这些薄弱墙壁的稳定性则完全取决于拱和扶壁的支撑。

不管靠的是什么样的思维过程，这一切都实现了，而且在结构与艺术方面取得了巨大的成就。等到石匠大师创造出中世纪鼎盛时期的哥特式建筑，建筑学已然失去了与其古典起源的任何可见的联系。比如，对比坎特伯雷大教堂与一座罗马会堂，几乎没有什么相同之处。但你还是可以简单明了地看出它们是一脉相承的。

图 11–2 引入侧廊和高侧窗需要发明飞扶壁

尽管像这样的建筑物通常十分漂亮，但它们的造价却高得吓人。不管怎样，拱顶或穹顶一般不适用于私人住宅。不用拱而用各种梁来支撑建筑物的屋顶，便宜得多也简单得多。如果被覆盖的空间横跨长杆或搁栅，那么这样的梁能将屋顶的重量沿其末端垂直向下传递到墙壁的砖石结构中，而无须任何侧推与外推作用。因此，梁不会对推力作用线造成不受欢迎的干扰，墙壁也可以建得相当薄而且不需要扶壁支撑（见图 11–3）。

图 11–3 简支屋顶桁架。图中所示装置被安装在滚子上，支承墙不受外推作用

单凭这个原因，梁就称得上是整个结构工程领域最重要的装置之一。然而事实上，梁及其等效物桁架的应用并不仅限于建筑物的屋顶；梁与梁理论确实发挥了非常重要的作用，它们使技术文明成为可能。类似的观念在生物学领域也不断涌现。

「梁」（beam）这个词在古英语中的意思是一棵树，这种用法仍保留在像「白面子树」（whitebeam）和「角树」（hornbeam）这样的树木名称中。虽然如今的梁一般都是用钢材或钢筋混凝土制成的，但许多年来「梁」在结构学意义上指的是木梁，通常是一整根树干。尽管砍倒一棵树要比建造一个砖石砌拱或砖石拱顶更便宜也更省事，但合适的大型树木的供应并不是无限的，一旦长木料变得稀缺，大限就到了。当这种情况发生时，人们可能就不得不用短木料来搭建屋顶了。

屋顶桁架

在现代人看来，尝试用短木料架设屋顶跨度的最有前景的方式，就是把短木料接合起来 —— 类似于组装玩具 —— 制作出一个三角结构，如图 11–4 所示。这其实就是格构梁的开端。我们都很熟悉钢制铁路桥中的格构梁。这类任意三角格栅结构被称为「桁架」。当屋顶桁架设计得当时，它就像一条长的实心梁，经济上允许相当大的屋顶跨度，而不会将任何危险的外推作用施加于支承墙。如同关于梁与梁的理论，现代技术中桁架方法的应用不仅限于此，它已延伸到船舶、桥梁、飞机以及其他形形色色的结构装置中。如我们在上一章所见，系杆拱其实是相同方法的另一个例子。

图 11–4 如果无法获得长木料，就可以像组装玩具那样用短木料搭建屋顶桁架

然而在建筑学历史上，桁架或格构梁概念的发展异常缓慢。该观念最原始的形式 —— 普通的木制屋顶桁架，对我们来说似乎显而易见，但我们的祖先却花了很长时间才想到它。而且，那时他们从未见过铁路桥，也从未玩过组装式玩具。最终，建筑桁架的方法直到罗马帝国晚期才出现，但它在中世纪之前并未真正流行起来。在古代的大部分时间里，建筑师都在没有桁架的情况下工作。

希腊建筑工匠从未想到用桁架。卓越的雅典建筑师，比如营建雅典卫城山门的穆尼西克里（Mnesicles）及设计帕提侬神庙和巴塞的阿波罗·埃皮鸠里神庙的伊克提鲁斯（Ictinus），都有意识地避免用拱和拱顶作为他们的建筑物屋顶，可是他们显然也未能发明出屋顶桁架或设计出任何真正合适的替代结构。发展到柱顶过梁阶段后，希腊建筑学的辉煌似乎戛然而止了。希腊式屋顶只能被形容为才智上的不堪。

简单的石梁或石楣无法安全地用于跨距超过 8 英尺（2.5 米）的情况，否则它们就很容易开裂。因此，为了给神庙和其他建筑物提供实用的屋顶，有必要使用木梁；但事实上，在古希腊，木料已变得几乎和现代希腊一样稀缺。

希腊神庙中通常包含一定数量的满跨度木制屋顶梁，在这里，梁只是简单地横卧在墙壁和列柱廊石楣的顶部。这些梁或搁栅随后会用木板盖住，以使整座建筑物具有一个连续的平顶（见图 11–5）。但是，这种平顶只是由普通木板构成，无法遮风挡雨。所以，其上需要覆盖一大堆混以水和稻草的黏土。就一座平均尺寸的神庙而言，这种黏土堆重约 3 000 吨。当所有这些农用材料堆在那里并被完全夯实后，黏土堆会被精确修整成三角状的坡顶或斜顶。之后，将屋面瓦简单地铺在黏土堆上即可，就好像为花园小径铺上了石子。人们想必希望这一大块湿黏土尽快干燥，免得腐朽。变干后，它将成为害虫的绝妙庇护所；但在炎热的天气里，其优异的隔热性能无疑会大受欢迎。

图 11–5 古风时代希腊神庙的屋顶

当然，有时使用更短的梁或椽也是有必要的。所罗门王与希兰王签订了专门的政治协议 [4]，由黎巴嫩供应香柏，但即便如此，所罗门王的屋顶梁也只有约 25 英尺（7 米或 17 肘）长。许多希腊神庙的梁都比这还短。就像所罗门的建筑物那样，希腊神庙里的短椽是直接靠下面的一排排柱子来支撑的，不管建造起来是否方便。在意大利南部的帕埃斯图姆坐落着伟大的多立克柱式神庙（建造于约公元前 550 年），其中一座的一列圆柱立在正殿中央，将其分成两个面积相等的过道。这肯定会给任何类型的宗教仪式造成很大的不便。在晚期的大多数神庙中，布局普遍更得体也更对称（见图 11–6），但即便是帕提侬神庙内也散乱地竖立着我们认为没有必要的柱子。

图 11–6 更精致的 5 世纪神庙设法在不使用桁架的情况下支撑起屋顶

最简单的屋顶桁架样式是「A」字形，它是在中世纪发展起来的。横穿桁架底部的水平承张构件或系杆被建筑工匠称作「领梁」。对短跨度而言，一般很容易找到足够长的领梁木料来制作如图 11–7 所示的简单三角桁架，但对小型的两层住宅来说，这种配置则常常导致相当笨拙的建筑比例；此外，屋顶上可能会浪费很多空间。基于这些原因，建筑工匠把领梁架在更高的地方 —— 实际上，他们将楼上的部分房间设置在屋顶内，并在必要处开设屋顶天窗。这一切都非常好，但如果领梁被架设在桁架的高处，那么在屋顶重量的作用下，椽会呈向外弯曲或劈开的趋势。这同时会向外推动墙壁（见图 11–8），极有可能导致代价惨重的后果。领梁放置得越高，后果很可能越糟糕。

图 11–7 屋顶桁架领梁与墙顶平齐的简单两层住宅

大型的中世纪大厅和教堂的跨度通常相当大，所以盖屋顶是一个棘手的问题。桁架式屋顶可能比拱式或拱顶式砌筑顶造价更低，但即便可以找到足够长的木料来制作标准长度的系杆或领梁，若这些领梁被安放在建筑物中相对较低的位置，也会破坏正殿或大厅的建筑效果，尤其是它们会挡住通向大窗户的视野。因为那时候的人通常比较落后，关注外观甚于「效率」，所以欧洲大陆的建筑工匠都忠于砖石拱顶结构，通过繁复且昂贵的扶壁加固方法来支撑建筑物的拱形屋顶。

图 11–8 为了节约空间和成本，将领梁提升过高的后果（略有夸张）

一个典型的例子是，英格兰的建筑工匠制造出一种折中或权宜类型的木屋顶，被形容为「新颖性大于科学性」。这就是「椽尾梁」屋顶（见图 11–9）。在英格兰，椽尾梁屋顶比较受大型建筑物的欢迎，可见于威斯敏斯特教堂大厅、牛津大学或剑桥大学的许多学院建筑，以及今天的一些大型私人住宅。它们饱受艺术赞誉，或许部分原因是桁架的「关节」为富有想象力的木雕工匠提供了机会。多萝西·塞耶斯（Dorothy Sayers）的书迷一定记得，彼得·温西勋爵与芬丘奇街圣保罗教堂椽尾梁上雕刻的天使及智天使基路伯的冒险故事。[5]

用结构学术语来说，相较于任何类似的有高领梁的大型桁架，椽尾梁桁架的主效用是将外推作用在支承墙上的施力点进一步下移，以减小它对最重要的推力作用线的不利影响。虽然这在实践中很有效，但椽尾梁桁架从未引起讲求逻辑的欧洲大陆工程师的注意，所以在英国之外，其实例寥寥无几。

图 11–9 简单的椽尾梁屋顶。其效用是将外推作用（源自桁架的形变）在墙上的施力点进一步下移，以减小对推力作用线的影响。同时，端面窗口的视野会保持清晰

在传统的木制屋顶桁架中，接合处用的是木栓，有时是铁皮条。虽然这些接合方式并不特别有效，但在这样的结构中，主要需求是刚度而非强度，所以弱接合也无伤大雅。在大型现代建筑物中，比如工厂、工棚和仓库，屋顶桁架经常是由像角钢这样的钢材构成的，在这种情况下，不会出现任何特殊的问题。然而，在小型现代住宅中，屋顶桁架几乎总是木制的，木料的厚度常被削减到较低限度，甚至更低。尤其是平顶搁栅，其刚度可能刚刚达到能支撑平顶而不致灰泥开裂的程度。如果我们打算沉迷于将现代阁楼改为额外的卧室的时髦活动，那么最严重的问题很可能是地板的刚度。虽然屋顶桁架不太可能断裂，但人员和家具的额外重量导致的挠变很可能会严重损坏房屋，造成经济损失。业余的家装能手，请注意这一点。

船舶中的桁架

这风帆流逝之地，

库施河外之地，

遣使至尼罗河畔，

一苇杭之。

——《圣经·旧约全书·以赛亚书》（Isaiah 18:1-2）

事实上，在建筑工匠和岸上的建筑师开始考虑这个办法之前的数个世纪，造船工匠就已在使用并理解各种各样的桁架。大部分造船史都始于古埃及人在尼罗河上使用的小艇。就像先知以赛亚似乎察觉到的那样，这些小艇是将平行的几束芦苇秆绑在一起制作而成的。实际上，这些芦苇舟是从筏子发展来的，可以追溯到遥远的以赛亚时代之前，又或者是公元前 4000 年到公元前 3000 年。类似的小艇今天仍可见于白尼罗河和南美洲的提提卡卡湖。因为芦苇束朝末端自然变窄，故而或多或少自动地实现了大致的船型样式。芦苇束又长又细的末端通常以这样一种方式绑在一起，即将其向上翻转，以便在船头和船尾安放直立的装饰品。这个特征保留至今，有时形状变化并不太大，可见于地中海划艇那高高的船首柱，尤其是威尼斯小艇和马耳他平底舟。

虽然船舶的浮力大部分是由船体中部提供的且较少部分源自锥状末端，但没有什么能阻止人们将重物置于船舶末端。这样做的一个结果是，许多船都趋于「中拱」（两端趋于下垂而船体中部趋于抬升）的形状。这与屋顶和桥梁中存在的情况相反，它们的桁架中部往往会下垂到末端支撑物以下的高度。这种状态被工程师称作「中垂」。虽然在中拱和中垂的情况下力与挠变的作用方向相反，但在这两种情境中梁或桁架都显然处于弯曲状态，并且严格适用相似的原则和论证。

从结构学角度讲，船体也是一种梁，中拱作用力的效应在埃及小艇的柔性芦苇船体上表现得非常明显。一艘中拱的船看起来令人沮丧，这种状况需要用各种其他漂亮的理由来阻止，即便在公元前 3000 年也有必要针对这个问题想点儿办法。事实上，埃及人极其明智地解决了这个难题。他们给船舶安上了今天被称为「中拱桁架」的构件。它由一条结实的绳索构成，穿过一系列竖直支杆的顶部，两端被缠绕在船舶两头的下面和周围，以阻止船舶两端下垂（见图 11–10）。这条绳索可以用某种形式的「西班牙绞盘」来绷紧。这种装置中间是一根长棍或长杆，外面缠绕着绳索，故而可缩短。因此，大的芦苇船体可被拉紧到船长想要的任意程度，无论是在平直还是竖直方向上弯曲。随着造船工艺的进步，埃及人开始用木料而非芦苇束造船。但是，因为大部分木板都非常短，并且几乎所有紧固处都是摇摇晃晃的，所以对中拱桁架的需求仍然存在。

希腊造船工匠的技术水平比埃及工匠更先进，他们建造了雅典海上霸权所倚仗的壮观的三排桨军舰或帆桨战船。然而，这些舰船也是用短木料建成的，它们轻巧的船体非常柔韧但却很容易漏水。基于这些原因，希腊人以精致的形式保留了中拱桁架：用一条结实的绳索，在船体外的高处（船舷上缘下方）整整绕一圈。它也是通过西班牙绞盘来设置，舵手可根据需要调整。因为希腊军舰主要靠相互冲撞来作战，所以它们必须能经得起猛烈的结构性损伤。因此，中拱桁架是这些舰船的必备部分；没了它，舰船将无法战斗，甚至根本不能出海。正如过去给现代军舰解除武装的惯例是从舰炮上移除炮闩，在古典时代，裁军专员常通过移除中拱桁架给三排桨军舰解除武装。

图 11–10 大约公元前 2500 年的埃及航海船。这种船是用木材建成的，但在船头和船尾处保留了芦苇小艇的竖直装饰物的特征。木制板条非常短且不利于紧固，因此这种船也保留了传统的埃及中拱桁架构件。注意其 A 字形桅杆

很明显，比雷埃夫斯港的雅典造船工匠熟悉建造桁架的原理，有人很可能会问：为什么像穆尼西克里和伊克提鲁斯这样的雅典建筑师不曾在他们所造的神庙屋顶上应用这种理念呢？这或许是因为中拱和中垂间的相似性从未打动他们，抑或只是因为他们从未与造船工匠推心置腹。毕竟，如今又有多少房屋建筑师与船舶工程师交谈过？

随着易碎的帆桨战船被舍弃不用，中拱桁架也消失了。然而，19 世纪的美式内河蒸汽轮船一如希腊三排桨军舰或尼罗河上的埃及船只那样柔韧。它们薄薄的木制船体导致了相同的难题，美国人解决这些难题的方式也和古埃及人如出一辙。所有美式内河蒸汽轮船都配备了埃及模式的中拱桁架。唯一的区别在于，其承张构件用的是铁杆而非纸莎草绳，金属螺钉也取代了西班牙绞盘成为绷紧它们的工具。致力于提高航速的船长声称可通过拧紧或放松中拱桁架来调整船体的形状，从而使他们的蒸汽轮船再提高半节（1 节≈1.9 千米 / 小时）航速。事实上，这些蒸汽轮船船体漏水的状况，即使比三排桨军舰还糟糕，也没什么大不了的，因为它们配备了蒸汽舱底排水泵。

当然，桁架也会以多种不同的形式出现在几乎每一种帆船的帆装中。船帆很有可能也是一项埃及人的发明，因为尼罗河上的风在一年的大部分时间里都是向上游吹的，以至于运载货物的船能顺风逆流而上又顺流漂回下游，今日仍然如此。

建造帆船的第一个难题是竖起某种可扯起帆的桅杆，第二个也是麻烦得多的难题是把桅杆固定住。泛泛而谈，常规帆船的桅杆在结构上就是一种简单的杆或柱，靠固定的绳索系统获得来自各方向的支撑，水手们将这些固定绳索称为「静索」，即「横桅索」和「稳定索」。如果船体的刚性足以承受横桅索和稳定索的拉动，这就是最好的配置了，并且（如我们将在第 14 章看到的）是经数学证明的重量和成本最小化的配置。然而，埃及人没有做过这种数学分析，此外，他们对这个问题也没有先入为主的观念。他们只不过是相当厌烦划船，想找到某种办法来支撑芦苇小艇上的一种叫作帆的新奇事物。

我曾花大量时间开发轰炸机携带的充气救生艇的帆装，[6] 这样就能体会古埃及人在桅杆上付出的努力。或许，充气救生艇的膨胀船体几乎同古埃及的芦苇小艇一样柔韧。真的不能期望将高负载的绳索系在浸水气球或松软的芦苇束之类的东西上，在这些情境中，「静索」的概念变得相当可笑。因此，埃及人非常明智地在相当湿软的船体上安插了一种三脚架 —— 有时是一种「A」字形桁架（见图 11–10）。这个结构在尼罗河上的运行堪称完美；我曾羡慕过古埃及人对这个难题的解决办法，但不幸的是，这在救生艇上完全行不通。埃及人无须将整个帆装折叠起来装入一个小包，依次放进一架拥挤的飞机。

希腊和罗马商船的船体一般是十分强劲的，足以对抗常规静索施加给它们的载荷，故而这些船的桅杆竖立在船中部，并按常规方式由横桅索和稳定索来支撑。然而，出于某种原因，即使大型罗马舰船也极少超越一根长帆桁悬挂着一个大横帆的单桅样式。直到文艺复兴时代的大航海运动，大型帆船的帆装才随着桅杆和船帆数目的倍增而变得复杂起来。大约在这个时期，单桅被三桅取代，分别是前桅、主桅和后桅。最终，每一种桅杆都向上延伸，以便能在下横帆或「主帆」之上先挂起中横帆，然后是上帆，最后是顶帆。（更高的天帆和月帆出现的时间要晚得多，皆是快帆船时代矫揉造作的产物。）

传统上，每种帆 —— 主帆、中帆、上帆和顶帆 —— 都挂在桅杆上各自独立的位置，也就是说，每段下桅的上面都是一段中桅，每段中桅的上面都是上桅，以下类推。这些逐级向上的桅杆部位分别是由一段独立的木料构成的，每一段都在其适当的位置靠复杂而精密的滑动装置支撑。这种安排是为了让所有逐级向上的桅杆部位和帆桁可以不时地被降到甲板上。因为更大的船桅木每个重达数吨，在摇晃的船上需要兼具技巧与勇气才能升起或降下这么笨重的对象。然而，一艘大战舰的船员规模可达 800 人，他们中的大多数人足可傲视高空作业的工人和受过训练的运动员。19 世纪 40 年代，英国地中海舰队的海上操练方法成为传奇。据说，舰队司令吃完早饭后习惯下令「所有舰船放倒中桅，并汇报所花时间与伤亡人数」。无论实际情况如何，能确定的是像皇家海军马尔伯勒号这样训练有素的战列舰，可以靠其全体船员在几分钟内将桅杆逐级拆卸下来，之后再同样快速地安好帆装。这些竞赛性训练绝非浪费精力。舰船上载有充足的备用船桅木，船在紧急状况下的安全性或者战时行动的结果，往往取决于替换报废桅杆的速度。平时操练期间偶有人员伤亡是可以接受的，如同我们接受骑马或攀岩事故造成的伤亡。

这一切背后隐藏着卓越的结构技术，值得引起现代工程师的注意，而他们在这件事上往往自命不凡。在后来的帆船上，支撑所有桅杆上重物的索具，其复杂性的最佳代表是胜利号（见插图 14）或卡帝萨克号。例如，胜利号主桅的总高度约为 223 英尺（约 67 米）。它的主帆桁长 102 英尺（约 30 米），但它可随意延伸到 197 英尺（约 59 米）的总宽度，靠的就是滑动翼帆下桁。整个庞大的机制可靠地运行了多年，哪怕是在最可怕的风浪条件下，也比大多数现代机械可靠得多。

大帆船的桅杆或许代表了曾经最精密无疑也是最漂亮的桁架系统之一。以相当大的复杂性为代价，凌空结构的总重量降至一个安全的数字。但是，当 1870 年左右架设在旋转炮台上的大炮不得不被引入风帆战列舰时，人们却发现横桅索和其他绳索的网络过分限制了舰炮的射击弧度。为此某些装甲舰，特别是皇家海军的舰长号安装了三脚桅，以获得更好的火炮射界。这可以说是对埃及人立桅方法的回归。然而，这些三脚结构所增加的顶部重量，对这些舰船岌岌可危的稳定性产生了不良影响。它无疑导致了舰长号的倾覆，当时这艘军舰正在风雨交加的比斯开湾扬帆夜航，近 500 人因此溺水身亡。

悬臂与简支梁

显然在功能上，无论「梁」是以连续的长材料的形式 —— 实心树干、钢棍、钢管或钢搁栅 —— 出现，还是以某种开放式桁架的形式出现，都没有多大区别。后一种可能是木制屋顶桁架、航海绳索与船桅木，或者某种现代组装玩具式格栅，比如桥梁或高压输电塔。我们将会看到，动物中也多见这两种梁。桥梁、屋顶桁架、马背与腊肠犬通常是水平的，船桅、电线杆、高压输电塔和鸵鸟的脖子则通常是竖直的，但事实上差异不大。所有这些结构的基本用途都一样，也就是说，支撑垂直作用于梁的长度的载荷，不会在支撑梁的任何东西上施加纵向力。这本质上便是梁的所有用途所在。

可以认为，像船桅这样的事物是个例外，因为桅杆会有力地向下推挤船体。但同时，横桅索和稳定索正好以等大的力向上拉船体，所以没有净的垂直方向的力作用于船体，结果就是船在水中既不上浮也不下沉。类似的探讨适用于许多动物结构。例如，马的脖子就非常像桅杆。马的颈椎骨像桅杆一样处于挤压状态并向后推马的躯体，但马又像桅杆一样静立，靠的是马的颈部肌腱以等大且反向的力向前拉马的躯体。

就我们刚才探讨的意义而论，所有梁，无论对于有生命的物体还是无生命的物体来说，都有同样的作用。梁整体上可分成两个主要的范畴：「悬臂」与「简支」梁。事实上，梁还可进一步区别和细分，这往往有助于应试或其他目的，但我们暂时忽略它们。

悬臂是一种梁，它可被看作一端「内置」于某个刚性支持物（比如墙壁或地面），另一端伸出并支撑载荷的结构。高压输电塔、电线杆、船桅、涡轮叶片、角、牙齿、动物脖子、树、秸秆、蒲公英皆为悬臂，鸟类、飞机和蝴蝶的翅膀，以及老鼠和孔雀的尾巴，也是悬臂。

图 11–11 载荷分布的悬臂梁

简支梁（见图 11–12）是一种两端随意置于支持物之上的梁。

图 11–12 简支梁

从结构学角度看，这两种情况密切相关。我们由图 11–13 可知，简支梁等价于让两个悬臂背靠背并颠倒过来。

图 11–13 简支梁可被视为将两个悬臂背靠背并颠倒过来

桥梁桁架

这条路靠着简陋的栈桥横跨数百英尺深的山谷，这些栈桥在列车的重压下嘎吱作响。显然，再也找不到比这些结构更不牢靠的东西了，我总是在安全抵达另一边时长吁一口气。从车窗看出去，下方有令人眩晕的深度，着实可怕，若这脆弱的结构崩塌 —— 仿佛即将发生 —— 我们应该都会粉身碎骨，断无生还的希望。即便在东部诸州，这类原始桥梁尚存的也不在少数，据说几乎没有事故是因为它们的使用而发生。然而，它们极易毁于火灾，此乃从蒸汽发动机中掉落的灼热煤块所致。

—— 萨缪尔·曼宁（Samuel Manning），

《美国风光》（American Pictures）

英国铁路笔直、水平地跨越起伏的英格兰地貌，靠的是大量使用路堑、路堤以及壮观的石砌和铁制高架桥。这种工程上的铺张取决于资本和劳动力的供给，二者在维多利亚时代的英格兰皆充足。美国的情况则完全不同：[7] 距离遥远，资本稀缺，即便是无技傍身者工资也很高。在这个自由的国度，人人都是业余的，欧洲式的能工巧匠几乎没有。铁很昂贵，但廉价的木料无数。最重要的是，美国的铁道工程师就像他们的蒸汽轮船同行那样，准备用他人的生命和财产来冒险，这使得不列颠工程师的烟囱似的礼帽下的头发都竖了起来。而这些不列颠工程师并非过分谨慎之人，如今看来还有些轻率。当然，19 世纪的美国人惯于险中求生，这更多应归因于他们的工程师，而非印第安人或绿林强盗。

铁路以尽可能快的速度向西推进，伴以最少的昂贵路堑和路堤。当条件适宜时，可借助那些令曼宁牧师感到害怕的巨大木制高架栈桥来跨越山谷。传统上，它们总是与美国铁路相关联，而且多数留存至今（见插图 15）。从它们建成之日起，美国铁路公司便财源滚滚（中央太平洋铁路公司据说已发放了 60% 的红利），所以他们很快就能把许多不牢靠的栈桥换成结实的填土路堤，靠的就是从特制列车顶部倾倒泥土，直到整个木制结构被埋在土里，留待腐烂。

高架栈桥无法跨越宽阔起伏的河面，所以需要建造长跨度的大型桥梁。欧洲式的永久性桥梁常因资金和技术劳动力的缺乏而不可行，所以极度需求长且便宜的木制桁架，它们可由技术平庸的工人来制造。因为这些桁架的建造有潜在的利益，以及美国人皆无可救药地善于创造，所以在 19 世纪有相当数量的美国人把他们的时间花在发明桁架上。你在教科书里可以发现相当多的桥梁桁架设计，彼此略有不同，都以其发明者的名字命名。我们不必将它们都详细列举一遍，因为它们的运作差不多都基于类似的原理，但其中有两三种值得一提。

其中最早的一个是鲍尔曼式桁架（见图 11–14），它在美国的应用极其广泛，这或许更多是由于鲍尔曼的政治天才，而非技术天赋。他以某种方式说服美国政府，让其相信他的桁架是唯一「安全」的设计，并一度强制要求使用。这个立法程序可能也没有人们想象的那么难，因为多年来它已被专业的工程师视作实用的工作原则，美国国会议员对技术的无知完全可以说是无下限的。[8]

图 11–14 鲍尔曼式桁架

图 11–14 展现了只有三个节间的简化鲍尔曼式桁架。在实践中，通常还需要更多的节间，整个体系也趋于复杂化。除此之外，承张构件也过长。芬克式桁架（见图 11–15）和鲍尔曼式桁架发挥的作用一样，但若能用更短的构件就更好了。

图 11–15 芬克式桁架

我们可以有效地沿芬克式桁架的底部放置一个连续构件，将之或多或少地转变成普拉特或豪氏桁架（见图 11–16）。

图 11–16 普拉特或豪氏桁架

这就是通常在传统双翼飞机上使用的桁架。我们将会看到，将普拉特或豪氏桁架颠倒过来也一样好 —— 不论是在中拱还是中垂的情况下 —— 只要我们采取某些常识性的预防措施。此外，如果让所有构件既能承张又能承压，我们就可以将该结构简化为沃伦式主梁，如图 11–17 所示，或者类似的形式，这是最常用的普通钢构桁架。

到目前为止，我们把所有这些桥梁都看作简支梁，当然，它们中有很多过去和现在都是简支梁。然而，也有一些梁式桥属于悬臂桥。不知何故，悬臂桥在木制构造中从未真正流行，但它们如今广泛应用于钢材和混凝土建筑中。很大一部分横跨高速公路的桥梁都是钢筋混凝土悬臂桥，其中央部位就是架在两个悬臂末端的简支梁（见图 11–18）。部分原因在于这样的配置更容易适应挠变。然而，有少数桥梁上面的两个悬臂正好从两边伸出来，在中间相遇。

图 11–17 沃伦式主梁

图 11–18 中央部位是简支梁的悬臂桥

在兴建超长铁路桥的年代，建造大型钢悬臂桥成为潮流。其中最著名的例子是 1890 年落成的福斯铁路桥，它是第一座用平炉钢建造的重要桥梁，事实上，它用了 51 000 吨平炉钢。但是，公路桥往往不需要像铁路桥那样有如此大的刚性（福斯铁路桥据说是世界上唯一一座允许列车全速通过的大型桥梁），所以大部分现代桥梁都是悬索桥，它们的造价通常更便宜。福斯公路桥与其邻近的铁路桥的总跨度相近，它完工于 1965 年，仅用了 22 000 吨钢材。

桁架和梁中的应力系

由这一切可知，种类繁多的梁与桁架显然在世界范围内承载重负方面扮演了极其重要的角色。目前尚不是很清楚它们是怎么做到的。梁中的应力如何作用，又是什么真正让结构不倒？如我们所说，格构桁架和实心梁总能互换使用，因而可以设想，桁架内的应力系统在原则上和实心梁内的应力系统没有多大区别，尽管它有更易形象化的优势。此外，悬臂可能比简支梁更容易探讨，尽管就像我们从图 11–13 中看到的，这两种情况之间存在相当简单的关系。

因此，让我们考虑一个悬臂式桁架，它一端固定在墙上，另一端向外伸出以支撑载荷 W。我们可以从初制或新制的悬臂开始，如图 11–19 所示，它呈简单的三角形排布。在这个悬臂中，重量 W 直接凭借斜构件 1 的张力的向上分量的作用而保持不跌落。水平构件 2 中的抗压力只作用在水平方向上，所以它对承重不起直接作用。但是，它们也只在水平方向上对物体起作用，2 号构件在维持桁架伸展上发挥着一种间接但非常必要的功能，即沿自己的方向伸展。

现在，让我们给这个桁架再增加一块板，如图 11–20 所示。显然，现在重量直接是靠 1 号构件的拉应力和 3 号构件的压应力合成的向上作用力来支撑的。4 号构件必然处于拉伸状态，但像 2 号构件（仍然处于压缩状态）一样，它对承重没有直接贡献，虽然没有它的话，桁架是支撑不起来的。

图 11–19

图 11–20

如果我们用几块板建成一个桁架，如图 11–21 所示，总的情况仍然差不多。对角构件 1 和 5 处于拉伸状态，而构件 3 和 7 处于压缩状态，仍然是这些构件在直接支持载荷。总的来说，这些构件是在对抗所谓的「剪切」。在下一章，我们会对剪切进行详细讨论。同时，我们可能观察到作用在所有这些对角构件上的力的数值相近。不管悬臂有多长，也不管木板有多少块，这都是正确的。

图 11–21

但是，水平方向上的力则不然。构件 2 的抗压力比构件 6 的大，同样，构件 4 的拉力也比构件 8 的大。我们制作的悬臂越长，2 号构件的抗压力就越高，4 号构件的拉力也越大。如果我们制作的悬臂很长，那么接近固定端点的横向或纵向的拉力、抗压力和应力可能会非常高。换言之，这样的悬臂或许会在其根部附近断裂，这毕竟只是常识。然而，我们的确遇到了明显的矛盾，构件内最大的力反而不直接支撑载荷。

在图 11–21 中，向下的载荷或「剪切力」，如我们所说，直接是靠曲折的对角构件 1、3、5 和 7 来支撑的。然而，我们可以通过引入更多的斜构件让这个对角格构复杂化，它们都履行相同的功能。事实上，这通常是各种原因作用的结果（见图 11–22）。这也正是大自然的频繁所为。大多数脊椎动物的躯干和肋腔都可被视为一种简支梁，这在马的身上是显而易见的。脊椎骨和肋骨构成了相当复杂的芬克式桁架（见图 11–15 和图 11–23）的承压构件。肋骨之间的空隙是纵横交错的肌肉组织网、网络或格构，大约同肋骨成 ±45° 角。

图 11–22 剪切同样能很好地由多重格构或连续板来承受

图 11–23 许多脊椎动物形成一种带肌肉和肌腱的芬克式桁架，在肋骨间构成相当复杂的对角剪切支撑

在工程结构中，下一步是填充桁架中间的空隙，不是用某种格构，而是用连续板或者钢材、胶合板等制成的「腹板」。这种梁可采取多种形式，但最常见的或许是普通的 H 形或 I 形梁（见图 11–24）。梁中部的连续板或腹板的功能正好与桁架中的曲折格构一样，所以腹板上的载荷和应力也是以差不多的方式运作的。

图 11–24 在许多工程梁中，剪切都是由连续的腹板来承受的。但剪切作用产生的拉应力和压应力仍在 ±45° 的方向上

因此，在 H 形梁中，顶部和底部的「梁缘」、「翼缘」或「凸缘」，都是用来对抗水平或纵向的拉应力与压应力的，而中部的「腹板」则主要用于对抗垂直力或剪切力。

纵向弯曲应力

如我们所说，纵向的拉应力和压应力沿梁的长度方向作用，往往比剪切应力更高也更危险，尽管这些纵向应力本身并不直接支撑载荷。对于在实践中常见的普通梁，纵向应力导致梁失效的情况很普遍，所以工程师会首先计算纵向应力。

虽然 H 形截面的梁（见图 11–24）普遍存在，但梁可以有任意形状的横截面，而且一般的梁理论计算适用于大部分简单形状的梁。事实上，横跨梁厚度的纵向应力分布在本质上类似于横跨砖石砌墙（见第 9 章）厚度的应力分布，二者之间的重要区别在于，砖石砌体不能承受拉应力，而梁可以。

每一道梁都会在施于其上的载荷作用下挠变，因此它会被扭成弧形或弯曲状。弯曲梁的凹面或承压面上的材料会缩短或受压应变，而凸面或承张面上的材料则会变长或受拉应变（见图 11–25）。如果梁的材料遵循胡克定律，那么横跨梁任意截面的应力与应变分布将是一条直线，而且会有某个零点，那里的纵向应力和应变既不是拉伸的也不是压缩的，而是零。这个点就位于梁的「中性轴」上。

图 11–25 跨梁厚度的应力分布

了解中性轴在梁上的位置很重要，而且幸运的是，它很容易确定。用代数方法可以很容易地证明，中性轴一定会经过梁截面的质心或「重心」。对简单的对称截面而言，比如矩形、圆形、管状和 H 形的梁，中性轴位于中部，在梁顶部和梁底部之间的正中央处。对非对称的截面而言，比如铁轨、船舶和机翼，就得通过计算确定其位置了，但也不是太难。

图 11–25 清楚地揭示了纵向应力随其到中性轴的距离的增加而增加。在谈论梁理论时，该距离一般被称作 y。[9] 现在，如果我们要寻求结构的「效率」，无论是根据材料重量、成本还是代谢能量，那么我们一定不想养一只不捉老鼠的猫。换言之，我们不愿意使用极少承载或不承载应力的材料。这意味着我们要尽可能减少靠近中性轴的材料，而尽量增加离它远的材料。当然，我们应该在中性轴附近留一些材料以便承载剪切应力，但在实践中，我们可能也不需要太多用于此目的的材料，相当薄的腹板可能就足够了（见图 11–26）。

图 11–26 如果到中性轴的距离为 y 的位置发生的弯曲所产生的拉应力或压应力为 s，则有，其中 M = 挠矩，I = 横截面积的二阶矩。如何得到 M 和 I，可参见附录 Ⅱ

这就是为何工程中的钢梁的横截面通常呈 H 形、槽形或 Z 形（见图 11–24）。这些截面的优点是，较易于在轧钢厂用低碳钢轧制成型。它们常被称为「轧制钢搁栅」，如今很大规格的也能买到。Z 形截面要优于槽形和 H 形，它的凸缘更容易被铆接到连续板上。这就是为什么 Z 形钢梁常用于船舶肋骨。

当这种简单的截面不适用时，常见的办法是使用组合的「箱式」截面。这些截面的第一次也是最重要的应用是罗伯特·史蒂芬孙建造的跨梅奈海峡的布列坦尼亚桥（见插图 16 与图 13–11）。因为引入了防水胶和可靠的胶合板，箱式梁常用于木制构造，尤其是木制滑翔机的翼梁（见图 13–5）。

当然，在我们考虑板材时，同样的论证也适用。金属薄片在弯曲的情况下既弱又柔韧，而为了节省重量，我们希望尽可能获得一个更厚的截面。这经常是通过将波纹板轧制成金属片实现的，但用波纹铁会带来糟糕的后果。[10] 波纹金属片过去被用作船舶和飞机的外壳，尤其是老式的容克单翼飞机。但是，反对的理由也显而易见，如今在船舶工业与航空航天工业领域，更普遍的做法是通过将叫作桁条的金属角铆接或焊接到外壳内表面来增加其刚度和强度。

在所有这些情境中，载荷普遍只从一个方向作用到梁上，而横截面的形状也因此达到最优。然而，在某些工程结构和很多生物结构中，载荷可能来自任何方向。对路灯杆、椅子腿、竹子和腿骨来说，这大致是正确的。为达到这样的目的，最好使用圆的空心管，当然这正是通常的做法。一种折中情况出现在百慕大式桅杆上，这些桅杆通常是由截面为椭圆形或梨形的管构成的。这主要不是为了像通常设想的那样以「流线型」表面减小风阻，而是为了迎合一个事实，即侧向支撑一根现代桅杆要比沿船头到船尾的纵向平面容易得多，所以桅杆截面必须考虑到这一点，在纵向上提供更大的强度和刚度。

[1] 当然，大量的小型诺曼式教堂都有简单的木制屋顶，但这些屋顶的设计常导致它们施加在墙壁上的外推作用几乎同石质拱顶一样糟糕。

[2] 庞贝城的窗户不足，人工光源必定也很糟糕，几乎所有房间的墙壁都被涂成了深红色或黑色。我们想知道这是为什么。

[3]「对圣公会来说，我非支柱，而是扶壁，因为我是自外部支持它的。」—— 墨尔本勋爵（Lord Melbourne）

[4] 见《圣经·旧约全书·列王纪上》第 5 章（有提示显示，所罗门王被迫支付了高昂的代价）。

[5] 塞耶斯的这本书名叫《九个裁缝》（The Nine Tailors ）。但在伯克郡的威克汉，圣斯威辛小教堂的屋顶桁架则装饰着维多利亚时代的巨大纸象。

[6] 任何不走运的飞行员都可能被动地体验过这些设备，为了他们的利益，我会告诉你如今我在以完全不同的方式开展这项工作。

[7] 美国铁路每英里的成本为英国铁路的 1/5，尽管美国人的工资要高得多。

[8] 1912 年，在美国政府质询邮轮泰坦尼克号事故期间，下述交谈被记录下来：

参议员 X：是你告诉我们这艘船装配有水密隔舱的？

专家证人：是的。

参议员 X：那你能解释一下这是怎么回事吗？当船沉没时，为什么乘客不能进入水密隔舱？

[9] 见附录 Ⅱ。

[10] 也要注意蚌壳上和多种树叶上的波纹，比如，角树的叶子。