Collect for the 4th Sunday after Epiphany

As one would expect, the ways in which structures fail under compressive loads are rather different in their nature from the ways in which they break in tension. When we stress a solid in tension we are, of course, pulling its atoms and molecules further apart. As we do so, the interatomic bonds which hold the material together are stretched, but they can be safely stretched only to a limited extent. Beyond about 20 per cent tensile strain, all chemical bonds become weaker and will eventually come unstuck. Although the actual details of the tensile fracture process are complicated, it is broadly true to say that, when a sufficient number of interatomic bonds have been stretched beyond their breaking point, the material itself will break. The same sort of thing is also true when a material is broken by shearing. Strictly speaking, however, there is normally no analogous case of interatomic bond failure which is simply and directly due to compression. When a solid is compressed, its atoms and molecules are being pressed closer to each other, and under any ordinary conditions the repulsion between the atoms goes on increasing indefinitely as the compressive stress is raised. It is only when subjected to the enormous gravitational forces which exist in those stars which astronomers call ‘dwarfs' that the compressive resistance between atoms collapses – with nightmarish consequences.*

Nevertheless, lots of very ordinary earthly structures do break by what is commonly described as ‘compression'. What is really happening in failures of this sort is that the material or the structure finds some way of evading an unduly high compressive stress, usually by moving ‘out from under' the load: that is to say, by running away in a sideways direction, using one of the escape routes which are practically always available. Looked at from the energy point of view, the structure ‘wants' to get rid of an excess of compressive strain energy, and it will do so by means of whatever energy-exchange mechanism happens to be practicable in the circumstances.

Compression structures are thus apt to be rather shifty characters, and the study of compressive failure is more or less the study of ways of getting out of a tight place. As one might suppose, there are a number of different means of doing this. The escape method which the structure will use naturally depends upon its shape and proportions and upon the material from which it is made.

We have already discussed masonry at some length. Although buildings are essentially compression structures – and masonry must be kept in compression all the time – yet they cannot be said to fail by compression at all. Paradoxically, they can only fail by getting into tension. When this happens walls have a bad habit of developing hinge-points, as a consequence of which they tip up and fall down. Although arches are rather more stable and responsible structures than walls, they are capable at times of producing four hinge-points, after which they diminish both their strain energy and their potential energy by folding themselves up and reducing themselves to a heap of rubble. In any case, as we calculated in Chapter 9, the actual values of the compressive stresses in masonry are usually very low, far below the official ‘crushing strength' of the material.

Crushing stresses – or the failure of short struts and columns in compression

However, if we take a brick or a block of concrete of fairly compact shape and subject it to a large compressive load – in a testing machine or by any other method – the material will eventually break in a manner which is conventionally called ‘compression failure'. Although brittle solids like stone, brick, concrete and glass are generally crushed in such a way that they are reduced to fragments, or sometimes to powder, the failure is still not, in the strict sense, a compressive one. The actual fracture nearly always takes place by shearing. As we said in the last chapter, both tensile and compressive stresses necessarily give rise to shears at 45°; it is these diagonal shears which generally cause ‘compressive failure' in short struts.

Figure 1. Typical ‘compression failures' for a brittle solid such as cement or glass. Fracture is really due to shearing.

As we also said earlier on, all practical brittle solids are full of cracks and scratches and defects of one kind or another. Even if this is not the case when they are first made, such materials very soon become abraded from all sorts of virtually unavoidable causes. Naturally these cracks and scratches point in all directions in the material. It follows that a fair number of them will always be found to lie in directions which are diagonal to an applied compressive stress, that is to say, more or less parallel to the resulting shear stress (Figure 1).

Like tensile cracks, these shear cracks have a ‘critical Griffith length'. In other words, a crack of a given length will propagate at a certain critical shear stress. When such conditions are reached in a brittle solid, such as concrete, the shear cracks will propagate suddenly, violently and perhaps explosively. When a shear crack has run diagonally across the width of a strut or other compression member, the two parts naturally slide past each other, so that the strut is no longer capable of carrying a compression load. The resulting collapse is likely to result in a large release of energy, and this is why brittle materials like glass and stone and concrete throw out splinters, which can be dangerous, when they are crushed or hit with a hammer. In fact the release of strain energy is quite often large enough to ‘pay' for reducing the material to a powder. This is what happens when we crush lumps of sugar with a hammer or a rolling-pin.

The failure of a ductile metal – or, come to that, of butter or plasticine – under compressive stress is due to similar causes. What happens is that the metal ‘slips' or slides (because of the dislocation mechanism) within itself under the shearing stress. Again this happens along planes roughly at 45° to the compressive load: thus a short metal strut bulges outwards into some barrel-like shape (Figure 2). Because of the high work of fracture of ductile metals, such materials are far less likely to throw off splinters during compression failure, and the immediate consequences of the fracture are likely to be less dramatic and a good deal less dangerous. It is this effect, the tendency to bulge under compression, which we make use of when we spread the head of a metal rivet by hammering it or by squeezing it in a hydraulic press.

Materials like wood and the artificial fibrous composites such as Fibreglass and carbon fibre materials generally fail in compression in a rather different way. In such cases the reinforcing fibres ‘buckle' or fold in sympathy with each other under the compres-sive load, so that what is called a ‘compression crease' runs across the material. These compression creases may run either diagonally or at 90° to the direction of the applied compressive stress or sometimes at various angles in between (Figure 3). Unfortunately compression creases often tend to form in fibrous materials at quite low stresses. These materials are therefore sometimes ‘weak in compression ‘, and this point needs to be considered when using them.

Figure 2. Failure of a ductile material, such as a metal in compression. Failure is again due to shearing, but this time the effect is to cause the metal to bulge.

Figure 3. Failure of a fibrous material such as wood or Fibreglass in compression. Note that the 90° crease involves a volume contraction and can therefore only take place in a material containing voids, such as wood. ‘Solid' composites must fail by mode (b), which does not involve a change of volume.

Breaking stresses of materials in tension and in compression

The various text-books and reference books generally make a great parade of tabulating the ‘tensile strengths' of common engineering materials. As a rule, however, these books are a good deal more reticent about compressive strengths. This is partly because the experimental values of the compressive failing stresses of materials vary much more with the shape of the test-piece which has been employed than do the tensile strengths. Sometimes this effect is so great that it becomes almost meaningless to quote a figure. However, although a cautious attitude to compression strengths is in some ways justified, it does have the effect of glossing over some of the facts of structural life. One of these facts is that there is really no consistent relationship at all between the tensile and the compressive strength of a material.* Some rather approximate figures for common materials are given in Table 5. The compressive strength values are those which might be obtained using test-pieces having a ratio of length to thickness of something like three or four to one. For specimens much fatter or thinner than this the breaking stresses might be quite different.

One of the obvious lessons to be drawn from Table 5 is that, when we come to design a thing like a beam which is stressed in both tension and compression, we may need to watch our step. It may be necessary to design a beam which has a highly asymmetrical section. In Victorian cast-iron beams the tension side is usually very much thicker than the compression side – because cast iron is weaker in tension than in compression (Figure 4). Contrariwise, the wing-spar of a wooden aircraft, such as a sailplane, is always much thicker on the upper or compression side, since wood is weaker in compression than in tension (Figure 5).

TABLE 5

Some materials with unequal tensile and compression strengths. (These figures are approximate.)

Tensile strength Compressive strength

Material p.s.i. MN/m2 p.s.i. MNim2

Wood 15,000 100 4,000 27

Cast iron 6,000 40 50,000 340

Cast aluminium 6,000 40 40,000 270

Zinc die castings 5,000 35 40,000 270

Bakelite, polystyrene and other brittle plastics 2,000 15 8,000 55

Concrete 600 4 6,000 40

Figure 4. Cast-iron beams are usually made thicker on the tension face than on the compression face because cast iron is weaker in tension.

Figure 5. A wooden glider wing-spar is usually made thicker on the compression side than on the tension face because wood is weak in compression.

The compressive strength of timber and of composite materials

He said he had been making masts for over fifty years, and, as far as he knew, they had all been sound spars. He said I was the only man he had ever met who deliberately planned to ruin a good mast by cutting the heart right out in a most sensitive spot. He said that any man who could do a thing like that would – (and here I tone down his words a lot) – curse aloud in church, wipe his nose on the table-cloth, take soundings in a cess-pit and eat the arming.

. . . And that was that. Both George and I thought secretly that the spar was a great deal too whippy for comfort, but in the face of those experts we decided it might be wise to keep our opinions locked up within us. Which was well. For the experts were expert. Later on, when our main shrouds did carry away in a wicked Gulf Stream squall, that mast bent – and bent -and bent, until it looked like the letter S; but it would not break.

Weston Martyr, The Southseaman

In real life, as soon as we start to deal with columns of any length the distinction between a column and a beam becomes a good deal confused. A longish column – such as a leg-bone of an animal – is nearly always subject to some degree of bending, and as a result the material on the concave side is compressed more than it is elsewhere. Contrariwise, in a beam or a truss, especially one of sophisticated design, the ‘compression boom' must be considered as a strut. In either case, if the material itself tends to be weak in compression, whether we call the structure a ‘beam' or a ‘column', failure will generally begin when the total compressive stress at the worst place reaches a dangerous level. The best examples of columns which are also subject to bending are provided by trees and the masts of traditional sailing ships. Tree-trunks have to sustain the weight of all the bits and pieces of the tree in direct compression, but, in practice, the stresses set up by bending forces caused by wind pressure are likely to be larger and more important. Again, masts are nominally struts, carrying only axial compression, but, because of the stretching of the rigging, and for other causes, they are in fact subject to a good deal of bending, especially if anything in the rigging should happen to break.

The masts of big ships like H.M.S. Victory had to be built up by joining many pieces of wood together with iron hoops, but for masts of more moderate size the traditional spar-makers preferred to use single pine or spruce trees, left as nearly as possible in their original condition. Not only did these craftsmen strongly resist any suggestion that a mast should be built up or hollowed out in such a way as to produce a more ‘efficient' tubular section; they also took care to remove as little as possible – beyond the bark -of the outer surface of the tree. In other words they tried, as far as they could, to use the tree in its natural state.

For many years professional engineers, who knew all about beam theory and neutral axes and second moments of area, despised this as so much traditional nonsense. In fact the first thing that a modern engineer does with a tree is to cut it up into small pieces, which he then glues together again – preferably into some kind of hollow section. It is only recently that we have realized that, after all, the tree does know a thing or two. Among other subtleties, the wood in various parts of the trunk grows in such a way that it is ‘pre-stressed ‘.

Figure 6. (a) Tree bent by the wind with no pre-stress in wood. Stress distribution across the trunk is linear and maximum tension and compression stresses are equal.

(b) Pre-stressed tree in a calm. The outside of the trunk is in tension all round; the inside is in compression.

(c) Pre-stressed tree in a strong wind. Compression stress is halved and this tree can bend twice as far as the one in (a).

Now in a beam such as a glider wing-spar, where the biggest bending load is practically always in one direction, it is possible, though not very efficient, to make the compression boom of the spar thicker than the tension boom to allow for the fact that wood is much weaker in compression than it is in tension. Things like trees and masts, however, may have to resist bending forces coming from many different directions – according to the caprices of the wind – and so this solution is not open to them. Trees, at any rate, have to have a symmetrical cross-section, usually a round one. For an un-prestressed section the distribution of stress under bending loads will be linear, as in Figure 6a. For such an arrangement, when the compressive stress reaches about 4,000 p.s.i. (27 MN/m2) the beam, that is the tree, will start to break.

This is where the pre-stressing comes in. Somehow or other the tree manages to grow in such a way that the outer wood is normally in tension (to the extent of something over 2,000 p.s.i. or 14 MN/m2), while the middle of the tree, by way of compensation, is in compression. Thus the distribution of stress across the trunk, under normal conditions, is something like Figure 6b. (One of the important consequences of Hookean elasticity is that we can safely and truthfully superpose one stress system upon another.) Thus, when we add Figures 6a to 6b we get Figure 6c.

By this method the tree roughly halves the maximum compressive stress (4,000 p.s.i.—2,000 p.s.i. = 2,000 p.s.i.) and so doubles its effective bending strength. It is true that the maximum tensile stress has been raised, but the wood has plenty in hand in this respect. What the tree does in the way of protecting itself by pre-stressing is exactly the opposite of what we do when we make a pre-stressed concrete beam. In the latter case the concrete is weak in tension and relatively strong in compression; the danger is that, when the beam is bent, failure may occur in the concrete on the tension face. To avoid this we put the steel reinforcing rods, which are inside the beam, permanently into tension, so that the concrete is permanently in compression. Thus the beam has to be bent considerably before the compressive stress in the concrete near the surface is relieved and replaced by a tension stress. Thus the cracking of the cement is postponed, since the beam has to be bent further before the critical tensile strain is reached.*

As we have said, both timber and the fibrous composite materials generally fail in compression by the formation of bands or creases of bent and buckled fibres. My colleague Dr Richard Chaplin points out that these compression creases have a good deal in common with cracks which occur in tension. In particular they are often started by stress-concentrations at holes or other defects in the material. In general, fastenings like nails and screws do not much weaken timber, always provided that they are in place and fit tightly. Once they are removed, however, the resulting hole has a much more serious effect; and no doubt the same is true of knots in timber. In a highly stressed wooden structure, such as a glider or a yacht's mast, it is therefore wise to leave unwanted nails and screws alone and not try to pull them out. If needs be, they can be cut off flush with the surface of the wood.

Furthermore, as Richard Chaplin says, the formation of compression creases in a fibrous material requires energy. In fact the amount of energy required is rather larger than the work of fracture of the material in tension. It follows that the propagation of compression creases needs a supply of strain energy and that their behaviour is something like that of a Griffith crack. There are, however, some important differences.

We have said that, in materials of the kind we have been discussing, compression creases can occur both at 45° and also at 90° to the direction of loading. (They can also occur at other angles between 45° and 90°.) The 45° crease is effectively a shear crack, and, if the conditions are right, it will spread right across the material, much like a Griffith crack in shear. However, the 90° crease is shorter – and therefore consumes less energy – for a given depth of penetration below the surface of the material.

For this reason the 90° crease is, on the whole, more likely to occur. However, although the 90° crease seems to be easier to start off, it is more likely to come to a halt after travelling for a short distance. This is because, as the crease advances, its two sides tend to get pinched together (or ‘come up solid') and so cease to release much strain energy. Thus complete failure is unlikely to take place, at any rate immediately.

What may happen in these circumstances is that many little creases will form, one behind the other, all along the compression surface of a beam. This can be seen on the compression face of a wooden bow, and sometimes with oars (Figure 7). Although engineers often advocate Efficient' H sections or box sections for beams, this can be a mistake. For reasons which are easily demonstrated,* the strain energy release conditions are often less favourable to the propagation of both cracks or compression creases when the beam section is rounded – like a tree – and this is probably the rationale behind the rounded cross-sections of most wooden bows. No doubt something of the kind is also relevant to the rounded cross-sections of the bones of animals.

Figure 7. Multiple compression creases on the compression face of a round piece of timber such as a tree, a mast, an oar or a bow. These creases may not be able to spread, and so complete fracture does not occur.

So long as the material is stressed consistently in compression there are many hindrances to the spread of compression creases. This is one of the reasons why wood is generally such a safe material. However, under conditions of reversed loading, it can be very dangerous indeed. This is because the buckled fibres which constitute a compression crease have little or no tensile strength, and so, under tension forces, the crease acts like an ordinary crack. It is especially dangerous because, in tension, there is now no restriction on the release of strain energy since the two sides of the crack are free to spring apart.

One of the best ways to arrange for a wing to come off a wooden glider in flight is to make a heavy landing with it. If one puts the aircraft down with a really bad bump, the wings will, momentarily, be bent downwards towards the ground. This may cause compression creases in the wood of what is normally the tension part of the main spar. If this happens, the creases are most unlikely to be spotted during routine inspections. The next time the glider is flown the spar may break in tension at this point, after which, of course, the wing will fall off.

Leonhard Euler and the buckling of thin struts and panels

What we have said so far applies to struts and other compression members which are fairly short and thick. As we have seen, these usually fail in compression by a diagonal shearing mechanism, or sometimes by the formation of local creases in the fibres. However, a large number of compression structures of one sort or another involve members which are long and thin and which fail in a totally different way. A long rod, or a membrane such as a thin sheet of metal or a page of this book, fails in compression by buckling, as can very easily be seen by doing the simplest experiment. (Take a sheet of paper and try to compress it lengthwise.) This mode of failure – which has important technical and economic consequences – is called ‘Euler* buckling' since it was originally analysed by Leonhard Euler (1707-83).

Euler came from a German-Swiss family well-known for its mathematical ability, and he very soon acquired fame as a mathematician: so much so that, while still quite young, he was invited to Russia by the Empress Elizabeth. He spent most of his life at the Court of St Petersburg, taking refuge for a time with Frederick the Great at Potsdam when the political situation in Russia got too exciting. Life at the courts of the Enlightened Despots in the middle of the eighteenth century must have been both interesting and colourful, but little of this is reflected in Euler's voluminous writings. As far as I can trace, there appears to be no incident of any noticeable human interest recorded of him in any of his biographies.* He simply went on for a very long time doing mathematics and writing it all down in an enormous number of learned papers, the last of which were still being published forty years after his death.

As a matter of fact, Euler did not really mean to do anything about columns at all. What happened was that, among a great many other mathematical discoveries, he had invented something called the ‘calculus of variations', and he was looking for a problem to try it out on. A friend suggested that he might use this method to calculate the height of a thin vertical pole which would just buckle under its own weight. It was necessary to make use of the calculus of variations to tackle this rather hypothetical problem because, as we mentioned in Chapter 3, the concepts of stress and strain were not invented until much later.

Put in modern terms, what Euler came up with was what we now call ‘the Euler formula for the buckling load of a strut', which is

(see Figure 9)

where P = load at which the column or panel will buckle

E = Young's modulus of the material

I = second moment of area (the so-called ‘moment of inertia') of the cross-section of the strut or panel (Chapter 11)

L = length of strut.

Naturally, all these quantities must be in mutually consistent units.

(It is curious, but convenient, that so many of these important structural formulae should be, algebraically, so very simple.*)

Euler's formula applies to all sorts and kinds of long, thin columns and struts – both solid and hollow – and, perhaps even more importantly, to thin panels and plates and membranes such as occur in aircraft and ships and motor cars.

Thus, if we plot the failing load of a strut or a panel against its length we get a diagram something like Figure 8, which shows two regimes of failure. For a short strut, failure will be by crushing. When the ratio of length to thickness increases to a value between about five and ten, then this line will be crossed by the curve which represents Euler buckling failure. Buckling now becomes the weaker mode, and so long struts will fail in this way. In practice the change-over from crushing failure to Euler buckling is not a sharp one and there will be a transitional region, something like the dotted line in the diagram.

Figure 8. Variation in the compressive strength of a column with its length.

The form of the Euler formula which has just been given assumes that the strut or panel is' pin-jointed', or free to hinge, at both ends (Figure 9). Usually, anything which tends to prevent a strut or panel from hinging at the ends will increase the buckling load. For the extreme case, where both ends are rigidly restrained, the buckling load, P, is multiplied by as much as 4. Very frequently, however, the achievement of any considerable degree of end restraint involves extra weight and complication and cost and may not be worth doing. Furthermore ‘rigid' end-connections will transmit any misalignment of the end-attachments to the strut. If this happens, the strut may be prematurely bent, and so, in practice, made weaker. For this reason the ‘rigid' stepping of masts, by attaching them both to the deck and the keel, is no longer usual (Figure 10).

Figure 9. Various Euler conditions.

(a) Both ends pin-jointed.

(b) Both ends fixed in direction and position.

(c) One end encastre, the other pin-jointed and free to move sideways.

It will be noticed that, in the Euler formula which we have just written down, there is no term which represents a breaking stress. The buckling load of a strut or a panel of a given length depends solely upon the ‘/' (or second moment of area) of the cross-section and upon the Young's modulus or stiffness of its material. A long strut does not ‘break' when it buckles. It just bends elastically in such a manner as to get out of the way of the load. If the ‘elastic limit' of the material has not been exceeded during buckling, then, when the load is removed, the strut will simply spring straight again and recover its original shape, quite undismayed by its experience. This characteristic can often be a good thing, for it is possible to design ‘unbreakable' structures in this way. Broadly speaking, this is how carpets and doormats work. Predictably, Nature uses the principle very widely, especially for small plants like grasses which inevitably get trodden on. This is why it is possible to walk on a lawn without doing it any harm. It is the ingenious combination of spiky thorns with Dr Euler's principle which makes a quickset hedge practically indestructible and impenetrable to both men and cattle. On the other hand, mosquitoes and other insects which make use of long slender stabbing weapons have to employ an indecent amount of low structural cunning to prevent these thin struts from buckling when they sting you.

Figure 10. If a column is clamped at the ends in such a way as to force it out of alignment, its buckling load may be reduced. Since rigging is liable to stretch, it is no longer customary to fix masts at both deck and keel.

During Euler's lifetime the actual technological uses for his formula were very few. Practically the only important application would have been in the design of ships' masts and other spars. However, contemporary shipwrights had already got this problem under control in a pragmatic way. The magnificent eighteenth-century text-books on shipbuilding, such as Steele's Elements of Mastmaking, Sailmaking and Rigging, contain extensive tables of the dimensions of every kind of spar, based on experience, and it is doubtful if these recommendations could have been much improved upon by calculation.

Serious interest in buckling phenomena only began about a century after Euler's time and was largely due to the increasing use of wrought-iron plates in constructional work. These plates were naturally much thinner than the masonry and woodwork to which engineers had been accustomed. The problem was first tackled seriously in the case of the Menai railway bridge, about 1848. The design of this bridge was the joint responsibility of three great men, Robert Stephenson (1803-59), Eaton Hodgkinson (1789-1861), a mathematician and one of the first professors of engineering, and Sir William Fairbairn (1789-1874), a pioneer in the structural use of wrought-iron plates.

Stephenson's railway suspension bridges had been a failure because they were too flexible. Furthermore, the Admiralty, not unreasonably, insisted upon a clear 100 feet (30 metres) headroom beneath the bridge for shipping. The only way of combining the necessary stiffness with the headroom which was demanded seemed to be to design a beam bridge far longer than had ever been built before. For various reasons it seemed best to make the beams, each of which had to be 460 feet (140 metres) long, in the form of tubes built up from wrought-iron plates, with the trains running inside the tubes.

It fairly soon became evident that one of the most serious design problems lay in the buckling of the iron plates which formed the upper or compression side of the beams. Although Euler's formula is accurate enough for simple panels and struts, the shape of the bridge tubes was necessarily complicated, and no adequate mathematical theory existed at that time. The three designers had thus no option but to experiment with models. As might have been expected, these proved to be confusing and unreliable – so much so that the three men quarrelled among themselves and at one time it looked as if the partnership would break up with no really safe design for the tubes in sight. Eventually, however, a cellular box beam was decided upon (Figure 11). To everybody's immense relief this proved satisfactory, and it is there to this day.

Figure 11. Britannia bridge: tubular box beam.

Since Stephenson's time, a very great amount of mathematical research has been carried out on the buckling of thin shells; but the design of such structures is still accompanied by even more than the usual degree of uncertainty. So the development of critical structures of this kind is likely to be expensive, because of the full-scale strength tests which may be needed before the design can be finalized.

Tubes, ships and bamboos – and something about Brazier buckling

Since, according to Euler, the buckling load of a strut varies as EI/L2, the compressive strength of a long column is liable to be very low indeed. The only thing we can do about this is to increase EI- if possible in proportion to L2. For most materials E, the Young's modulus of elasticity, is pretty well constant, so what we have to do in practice is to increase I, the second moment of area of the cross-section. This means that we have got to make the column fatter. That, of course, is exactly what we do in masonry, for instance in the sturdy columns of a Doric temple. The result, however, is excessively heavy, and if we want to make a light structure then we shall have to design some sort of expanded section. This sometimes takes the form of an ‘H' or star shape, or sometimes a square box. On the whole, however, round tubes are usually better and more efficient.

Figure 12. ‘Brazier' or local buckling of a thin-walled tube under axial compression.

The use of tubes is extremely popular both with engineers and with Nature, and tubular struts are very widely used for all sorts of purposes. However, a tube under compression has a choice of two modes of buckling. It may buckle in the way we have been describing: that is to say, in a long-wave mode, over its whole length, Euler-fashion. Alternatively, it may buckle in a short-wave mode, that is to say, locally, by putting a sort of crease or crumple into the wall of the tube. If the radius of the tube is large and if the wall is thin, then the strut may well be safe against Euler, or longwave, buckling; but it will fail by the local crumpling of the skin. This is easily demonstrated with a thin-walled paper tube. One form of this local buckling or crumpling is called ‘ Brazier buckling' (Figure 12). It is this effect which sets a limit to the use of simple tubes and thin-walled cylinders in compression.*

The commonest way to guard against Brazier buckling is to stiffen the skin of a thin-walled structure by attaching extra members, such as ribs or stringers, to it. StifFeners which run cir-cumferentially are generally called ‘ribs', while those which run lengthwise are called ‘stringers' (except by botanists, who will call them ‘ribs'). The shell-plating of ships is traditionally stiffened by means of ribs and bulkheads, though, recently, large tankers have been built on the ‘Isherwood' system, which largely depends upon longitudinal stringers. A sophisticated shell structure, such as an aircraft fuselage, is usually stiffened by both ribs and stringers. The hollow stems of grasses and bamboos, which tend to flatten when they are bent, are very elegantly stiffened by means of ‘nodes' or partitions or bulkheads, spaced at intervals along the stem (Figures 13 and 14).

Figure 13. Two ways of stiffening a hollow plant stem against local buckling.

(a) Longitudinal stringers.

(b) Nodes or bulkheads – common in grasses and bamboos.

Figure 14. Engineering shell structures such as ships and aircraft generally use both stringers and ribs or bulkheads. This is a diagram of the Isherwood construction often used in oil tankers.

Leaves, sandwiches and honeycombs

Thin plates and panels and shells are continually cropping up both in Nature and in technology, and, the larger and the thinner these structures are, the more likely they are to deflect or crumple under bending and compressive loads. In principle, anything which stiffens a column or a panel in bending will also increase its resistance to buckling and so make it stronger in compression. One way of doing this is by staying a strut or a panel with ropes or wires; this is a solution which is never used in plants. Alternatively, and perhaps preferably, one can stiffen the member with ribs or stringers, by corrugating it, or by making it of cellular construction.

Wood is a cellular material, and so are most other plant tissues, notably the stem-walls of grasses and bamboos. Furthermore, in the competitive struggle for existence, many plants depend critically upon the structural efficiency of their leaves, because they must try to expose the maximum area to sunlight, for photosynthesis, at the minimum metabolic cost. Leaves are therefore important panel structures, and they seem to make use of most of the known structural devices to increase their stiffness in bending. Nearly all leaves are provided with an elaborate rib structure*; the membranes between the ribs are stiffened by being of cellular construction, and in some cases they are further stiffened by corrugations. In addition to all this, the leaf as a whole is stiffened hydrostatically by the osmotic pressure of the sap.

In engineering structures, panels and shells are very often stiffened by means of ribs or stringers which are glued or riveted or welded to the plating, though this is not always the lightest or the cheapest way of doing the job. Another way of tackling the problem is to make the shell-plating in two separate layers which are then spaced apart by being glued to some kind of continuous support, usually made as light as possible. Arrangements of this kind are called ‘sandwich constructions'.

In modern times sandwich panels were first used for serious constructional purposes by Mr Edward Bishop, de Havilland's famous chief designer, for the fuselage of the now-forgotten Comet aircraft of the 193Os.† It is probably best known for its use in the successor to this aeroplane, the war-time Mosquito. In both these aircraft the core of the sandwich was made of light-weight balsa-wood, with skins of heavier and stronger birch plywood glued to either side.

Though the Mosquito was a most successful aircraft, balsa-wood is apt to soak up water and rot; moreover, supplies of this rather soft and fragile tropical wood are limited in quantity and variable in quality. As things turned out, research on core materials for sandwich shells and panels was much stimulated at about this time by another factor altogether; this was the introduction of airborne radar. With this equipment the moving radar reflector or ‘scanner' had to be housed and protected by putting it inside a large streamlined dome or fairing, which soon came to be known as a ‘radome'. Naturally these fairings had to be transparent to high-frequency radio waves, and this meant that, in practice, they had to be made from some sort of plastic, usually Fibreglass or Perspex. The transparency of the radome shell to radar could be much improved – at least in theory – by the use of a sandwich construction whose thickness was carefully related to the wavelength of the radiation which was being transmitted – in exactly the same way as the thickness of the coating or ‘blooming' on a modern camera lens is related to the wavelength of visible light.

Damp balsa, like any other damp wood, is nearly opaque to radar; and under war-time conditions balsa is practically always damp. This ruled out its use for radomes, and so it was necessary to develop more waterproof light-weight materials. This was done by ‘foaming' artificial resins of various kinds. The result looked something like a meringue or ‘Aero' chocolate (Figure 15). A good many foamed resins of this kind were developed; they have a number of virtues, and they were used not only for the cores of radome sandwiches but for all sorts of other structural sandwich panels as well. Some of them are still in use today. They are used, for instance, in boatbuilding because the walls of their cells or cavities are nearly impervious to water. However, for the cores of sandwich panels of the highest structural efficiency, resin foams are rather heavier and rather less stiff than one might wish. In other words, the market for light-weight core materials was more or less an open one.

Figure 15. Foamed resins are often used as light-weight core materials in sandwich constructions.

One day, towards the end of 1943, a circus proprietor called George May called to see me at Farnborough. After he had told me several Gerald Durrell-type stories about the difficulties of keeping monkeys in travelling circuses, he produced something which looked like a cross between a book and a concertina. When he pulled on the ends of this invention, the whole thing opened out like one of those coloured-paper festoons which people use for Christmas decorations. It was in fact a sort of paper honeycomb of very light weight but of quite surprising strength and stiffness. Did I think that such a thing could be of any use in aircraft? The snag, as George May modestly admitted, was that, since it was only made from brown paper and ordinary gum, it had no moisture resistance at all and would fall to bits if it got wet.

This must have been one of the relatively few occasions in history when a group of aircraft engineers have been seriously tempted to throw their collective arms around the neck of a circus proprietor and kiss him. However, we resisted the temptation and told May that there could be no serious difficulty in waterproofing the paper honeycomb by means of a synthetic resin.

This was exactly what we did (Figure 16). The paper from which the honeycomb was to be made was impregnated before use with a solution of uncured phenolic resin. After the honeycomb had been made and expanded, the resin was cured and hardened by baking it in an oven. As a result the paper was not only made waterproof but also strengthened and stiffened. This material was very successful and was used in the cores of sandwiches for all kinds of military purposes. Though it is not used a great deal in aircraft nowadays, something like half the household doors in the world are made by gluing thin sheets of plywood or plastic on either side of a paper honeycomb. It is even more widely used abroad, especially in America, than in England, and the world production of paper honeycomb must be very considerable.

Figure 16. Construction and use of paper honeycomb.

(a) Resin-impregnated paper is printed with parallel stripes of glue.

(b) Many sheets are glued together into a thick block with glue stripes staggered.

(c) When the glue is set, the block of material is expanded into a honeycomb. After this the resin is hardened.

(d) Slabs of honeycomb are glued between sheets of ply, plastic or metal to form a structural sandwich.

Although the use of sandwich construction, foamed resin cores and honeycombs is relatively new in engineering, it has been used for a very long time in biology. What is called ‘cancellous' bone (Figure 17) exploits this principle. Each of us carries around quite a good example in the bones of our skulls, which are, of course, subject to bending and buckling loads.

Figure 17. Cancellous bone.

* * *

* The result may be a concentration of mass so dense that its own gravita tional field is strong enough to prevent, not only the escape of any matter' but also the departure of all forms of radiation. Thus no two-way communication is possible with such an area, and these regions of the Universe are for ever barred to us. These localities are known as ‘Black Holes'. Like the island in Sir James Barrie's eerie play Mary Rose, they ‘like to be visited'; but nothing can ever return.

* In so far as failure in both tension and compression tend to occur by shearing – as in ductile metals – the tensile and compressive strengths would be identical. However, there are so many exceptions to this rule as to make it practically valueless.

* Note that many seaweeds, which are made largely from alginic acid – a weak and brittle substance – are pre-stressed in the same sense as reinforced concrete. Just as reinforced concrete economizes in steel, so seaweeds economize in the scarce, strong component, cellulose.

* As a crack or a compression crease with a straight front (like a saw cut) penetrates across a round section its surface area may increase more rapidly than the rate of release of strain energy from the material behind it; and so Griffith is frustrated.

* Pronounced ‘Oiler'.

* Except, of course, his increasing blindness in later life.

* Several modern proofs of Euler's formula are to be found in the textbooks. See, for instance, The Mechanical Properties of Matter by Sir Alan Cottrell.

* In a thin-walled circular tube local buckling will generally occur when the stress in the skin reaches a value equivalent to

where t = wall thickness

r = radius of tube

E = Young's modulus.

* The ribs of the leaf of the Victoria Regia lily are traditionally supposed to have inspired Sir Joseph Paxton's design for the Crystal Palace in 1851.

† Which had no direct connection with the later jet airliner of the same name.

Part Four

And the consequence was...

Chapter 14 The philosophy of design

–or the shape, the weight and the cost

Philosophy is nothing but discretion.

