Weston Martyr, The Southseaman

The steamer in Weston Martyr's story sank, rather suddenly, because the joints which were supposed to hold her timbers together were much too weak, although the house carpenters who built her – who were honest men in their own way – were presumably satisfied with them. In fact, when a shore carpenter is building a house or putting together traditional furniture he is in the habit of making joints which a naval architect or an engineer would regard as weak and highly inefficient. Weak these joints certainly are; whether they are ‘inefficient' depends upon what one is trying to do. The purposes of a builder of houses may not be at all the same as those of a builder of ships or aeroplanes.

It is perhaps too often assumed by engineers that an ‘efficient' structure is always one in which each component and each joint is exactly strong enough for the loads which it has to bear, so that, for a given strength, the smallest amount of material is used and the weight is minimized. Such a structure would, ideally, be equally likely to break anywhere. Or indeed, like the ‘one-hoss shay', it might break everywhere at once. To work towards this kind of efficiency calls for great vigilance on the part of the engineer, since the least fault in design or manufacture must introduce a dangerous weakness.

Approximations to this kind of structure do, of course, exist, especially in ships and aeroplanes and in some kinds of machinery where weight-saving is very important. However, this represents an unduly specialized way of looking at the problem of efficiency, and it takes no account of the need for rigidity, let alone of the need for economy. Structures of the one-hoss shay type are sometimes necessary, but they are always expensive both to build and to maintain. Weight-saving by means of structural perfectionism is one of the factors which make space travel such an extravagant luxury. Even at a mundane level we may reflect that the cost of usable space, per cubic metre, is about twenty times as high in a small ship as it is in an ordinary house; the cost of space in aircraft is a great deal higher still.

Builders and joiners have more sense than to go in for fancy structures of this kind; houses are quite expensive enough as it is, and these people know very well that in the great majority of the common or stationary affairs of life the design of a structure is influenced much more by its stiffness than by its strength.

Indeed it is the relative importance of the need for strength and for stiffness which really lies at the root of the question of the cost and efficiency of structures. Where the need is chiefly for rigidity rather than strength, the whole problem becomes very much easier and cheaper. This is nearly always the case with furniture and floors and staircases and buildings generally, and also with cookers and refrigerators and with many tools and heavy machinery and with some of the parts of motor cars. These things do not very often break, but, if we made the material much thinner, the deflections and bendiness and general wobbliness would soon become unacceptable. Thus, to be rigid enough, the various parts generally have to be so thick that the stresses in them are very low, often, from the engineer's point of view, absurdly so.

It follows that, in structures of this kind, even if the material is riddled with defects and stress concentrations, it probably does not matter Very much, and, what is more, the strength of the joints is unlikely to be critical; in many cases, a few nails may be perfectly adequate. This sort of thing is, of course, the basis of most people's instinctive approach to design. Millions of people who have never heard of Hooke's law or Young's modulus can guess the stiffness of a table or a chicken-coop quite nearly enough by experience and common-sense, and, if such things are made stiff enough, they are very unlikely to break under their ordinary, everyday loads.

Furthermore, a little bit of ‘give' in some of the joints may be no disadvantage, and this is more likely to be available in a traditional joint than in a sophisticated one. For one thing a certain amount of flexibility may enable the loads to be evened out in a beneficial way. Although it is true that furniture does not very often get broken, quite a good way of attempting to do so is to sit on a chair, three of whose legs are on the carpet while the fourth rests, hopefully, on the bare floor. With traditional furniture the load may be spread over all the four legs by the distortion of the tenoned joints; in modern factory-made chairs with ‘efficient' glued joints, these joints may just break, after which the chair is difficult to repair in any satisfactory way.

Another reason for encouraging a certain amount of flexibility in joints is that wood, and sometimes other materials, change their dimensions with the weather. Wood shrinks and swells in the cross-grain direction by up to 5 or even 10 per cent. Traditional joinery allows for this by means of ‘inefficient' slotted joints. In Churchill College we had a fine new High Table made from the best and most expensive wood, which had been scientifically glued together with strong, rigid joints. After a few months in the scientifically heated Hall, this table shrank and split down the middle. The result was not an unobtrusive little crack but a crevasse many yards long and quite capable of providing sheltered accommodation for large numbers of peas of normal or standard diameter.

Strong joints and frail people

Many deflection-controlled peasant structures are wholly excellent in their proper places but when we come to demand weight-saving and strength and mobility we may get into all sorts of difficulties, especially in relation to the reliability of the joints between the various parts. Historically, this has always been the most serious problem in ship construction and in windmills and water-mills. The great skill of the old shipwrights and millwrights lay in somehow combining sufficient strength for safety with the modicum of flexibility needed to allow for the ‘working' of timber. The older shipwrights erred on the side of flexibility, and, though their ships were often excessively leaky, they seldom actually broke at sea. It required the administrative abilities of modern war-time governments to produce wooden ships which really did fall to pieces.

Troubles with joints in ships and aircraft were a fairly prominent feature of both the World Wars. During the first war the Americans built a large number of wooden ships, both steam and sail, frequently by unorthodox methods; and many of these ships broke up. In the second war they produced even greater numbers of welded steel steamers, of which an even higher proportion broke, either at sea or in harbour. In England, in both wars, we manufactured very large quantities of wooden aircraft, which always seemed to be having joint troubles of one kind or another.

As far as aircraft are concerned this was not wholly surprising, for I remember being shown, right inside vital glued joints in the main structure, on various separate occasions:

A pair of scissors.

A first-aid manual (pocket-size),

No glue at all.

On the whole I do not think that most of these accidents were caused by sub-normal or abnormal people; I am afraid the guilt generally lay with very ordinary people, and that was just the trouble. Naturally, people get tired or bored, but I think the root of the matter was much deeper than that. Very few of those who made, or failed to make, these joints had any personal experience of a situation in which the failure of a joint could cause a fatal accident, though collectively they had a great deal of experience of things like cupboards and garden sheds, where the strength of the joints really mattered very little. All our efforts to persuade them that a badly made joint was morally equivalent to manslaughter foundered on a deeply-held folk tradition that it was silly to fuss about such things and that strength is a boring subject anyway. All this would not have mattered so much if it had not been practically impossible to inspect the joints properly after they were made.

In more recent years very efficient metal-to-metal adhesives have been developed which have a number of solid technical advantages, always provided that the joints are really conscientiously made. Unfortunately, their use in modern aircraft has been handicapped by the fact that it has proved necessary to provide a separate inspector to watch each worker throughout the gluing operation – also inspectors to inspect the inspectors. Rather naturally, these arrangements have proved expensive. In spite of all this, I am told that the use of glue in modern metal aircraft is increasing.

Stress distribution in joints

Since the function of a joint is to transmit load from one element of a structure to its neighbour, stress has somehow got to get itself out of one piece of material and then get itself into the adjoining piece; such a process is only too likely to result in severe concentrations of stress and consequent weakness. All the same, in a few favourable circumstances it may be possible to arrange for the stress to pass uniformly across the joint from one component to the other with little or no concentration of stress; this is more or less the case with a glued scarf joint in timber (Figure 1) and a butt-weld in metal (Figure 2).

Figure 1. Glued scarf joint in timber.

Figure 2. Butt-weld in metal.

However, it is by no means always practicable to use scarfed or butt-welded joints, and some form of lapped joint between two adjacent planks or plates is probably more common. This sort of geometry at once introduces stress concentrations, and as far as a ‘rigid' lapped joint is concerned it does not make much difference whether the joint is glued, nailed, screwed, welded, bolted or riveted. In all cases most of the load is transferred at the two ends of the joint (Figure 3).

Figure 3. Load transfer in a lapped joint.

For this reason the strength of such joints depends largely upon their width and very little upon the length of the overlap between the parts. This is why the simplest and commonest forms of riveted and welded joints between two metal plates (Figures 4 and 5) are reasonably effective and not much improved by complicating them.

Figure 4. Riveted lapped joint.

Figure 5. Welded lapped joint.

Very often we want to provide an end attachment for a tension bar or rod to some kind of socket or solid anchorage; again much the same considerations apply, except that in this case there is only one stress concentration, which usually occurs at the point where the rod enters its socket (Figure 6). If the rod is screwed into its anchorage, for instance, nearly all of the load is taken out by the first two or three threads, and any extra length of rod within the socket will do little or no good. Thus the difficulty which a thrush has in pulling a worm out of a lawn does not depend on the length of the worm; a short worm is just as hard to extract as a long one.*

Figure 6.

The distribution of stress which is shown in Figure 6 applies when the two components of the joint have similar Young's moduli, which is usually the case with metal-to-metal joints. It also applies when the rod or tension bar is less stiff than the material of its socket or anchorage – which appears to be the case with worms and lawns. If the rod or bar is substantially stiffer than the material into which one is trying to anchor it, however, the stress situation may be reversed and the stress concentration may exist mainly at the bottom or inner end of the rod or insert (Figure 7).

In practice, of course, both situations are likely to weaken the joint about equally. There may exist, perhaps, a ratio between the modulus of the insert and that of its surroundings which would give an optimum distribution of stress in the joint; but, if there is such a ratio, it is very difficult to hit it off in real life.

At one time I was concerned with making point attachments between a reinforced plastic wing and the metal fuselage of an aircraft. Although I should have known perfectly well about stress concentrations and worms in lawns and so on, I was foolish enough to begin by moulding strong wire cables, with frayed-out ends – like the roots of a tree – into the body of the plastic. When specimens of this ill-conceived construction were loaded in a testing machine, the wires pulled out of the plastic with a succession of cracking noises and at ridiculously low loads.

Figure 7. Load transfer in embedded rods under tension.

In the next experiment sword-like tapered steel blades or prongs were substituted for the cables and were moulded into the plastic Wing structure after being coated with a suitable adhesive (Figure 8). This time the test-specimen failed, not with a series of cracking noises, but with one loud bang, but still at just as low a load.

Figure 8. The wrong shape for a steel insert. This arrangement is weak.

After a pause for reflection and intelligent thought about worms, we tried out a series of wide spade-shaped steel inserts which were much shorter and looked something like Figure 9. All these failed at far higher loads which were, in each case, proportional to the breadth of the ‘spade'. By developing this design we were able to take out loads in the region of 40 to 50 tons from plastic structures by means of quite a small steel fitting.

Figure 9. The right shape for a steel insert. This is much stronger.

Such joints depend entirely upon the adhesion between the metal and the plastic and must therefore be moulded conscientiously and under suitable inspection. They must also be designed with care, because, in all such cases, adhesion between a metal and a non-metal will fail completely as soon as the metal reaches its yield-point and ceases to behave elastically.* Since the stresses in the metal are much higher than one might expect, it is generally necessary to make the insert from high tensile steel, carefully heat-treated. Furthermore the ‘trailing edge' of the steel insert must be ground sharp, like a chisel.

Riveted joints

‘I've got one-fraction of an inch of play, at any rate,' said the garboard-strake, triumphantly. So he had, and all the bottom of the ship felt easier for it.

‘Then we're no good,' sobbed the bottom rivets.' We were ordered- we were ordered – never to give; and we've given, and the sea will come in, and we'll all go to the bottom together! First we're blamed for everything unpleasant, and now we haven't the consolation of having done our work. '

‘Don't say I told you,' whispered the Steam, consolingly;' but, between you and me and the last cloud I came from, it was bound to happen sooner or later. You had to give a fraction, and you've given without knowing it. Now hold on, as before. '

Rudyard Kipling, The Ship that Found Herself

Riveted joints in steel structures are rather out of fashion, chiefly because they are expensive but partly because they tend to be heavier than welded joints. This is a pity, because riveted joints have several advantages. A riveted joint is reliable and easy to inspect, and in a large structure it acts to some extent as a crack-stopper: that is to say, if a really large and healthy Griffith crack gets under way, it may quite often, though not infallibly, be stopped or delayed by the moat or discontinuity of a riveted joint.

Even more importantly, riveted joints can slip a little and so redistribute the load, thus evading the consequences of the stress concentrations which are the bane of all joints. The process has been described for all time in The Ship that Found Herself, and indeed Kipling's feeling for the problems of stress concentrations and cracks in structures, many years before Inglis and Griffith, is very remarkable; some of his stories about structures might well be required reading for engineering students.

Because each individual rivet can slip very slightly, the worst effects of stress concentrations may be reduced, and so it may be worth while to make lap joints having several rivets in series, since the end rivets may be able to slip enough to enable those in the middle to do some work. When a newly made riveted joint between steel or iron plates has settled itself into a reasonable distribution of load, then rust may have a chance to play its beneficent part. The products of corrosion, iron oxides and hydroxides, expand and so lock the joint and prevent it from sliding backwards and forwards when the load is reversed. Furthermore, the rust transmits some of the shearing forces between the plates, rather like a glue, and therefore the strength of a riveted lap joint generally increases with age.

Figure 10. Three of the ways in which a riveted joint may fail.

(a) Failure by shearing the rivets.

(b) Failure by tearing the rivets out of the plate (i.e. by ‘bearing' or elongation of the holes).

(c) Failure by tearing the plates.

When rivet holes are made in large steel structures, such as ships and boilers, it is usual to punch them. Although this is a quick and cheap way of making holes in steel it is not entirely satisfactory, since the metal at the edge of the hole is left in a brittle condition and also often contains small cracks. Since there will certainly be stress concentrations in this region, this is not a good state of affairs. For this reason, in high-class work, it is usual to punch the holes under-size and then ream them. Although this adds to the expense, it also adds materially to the strength and reliability of the joint.

Both riveted and bolted joints can be made in all sorts of different shapes and sizes but, broadly speaking, all such joints have a choice of three different ways of failing (Figure 10): (a) by shearing or breaking off the rivets themselves; (b) by tearing the rivets out of the plate (i.e. by ‘bearing' or elongation of the holes); or (c) by breaking the material of one of the plates in tension between the rivets, like tearing off a postage stamp.

It is generally necessary to check the possibilities of failure by each of these three mechanisms by doing a suitable calculation. However, ‘rules' for the design of riveted joints are laid down by organizations like Lloyds and the Board of Trade, and these are to be found in nearly all the engineering handbooks.

Welded joints

Welded joints of all kinds are very widely used in steelwork today, mainly because welding is generally cheaper than riveting and also because there is some increase in strength and saving in weight. In ships, too, the absence of rivet heads below the water-line reduces the resistance by a small amount.

Most sophisticated welding is electric arc welding. In this process the welder holds a metal rod, the welding rod, in his right hand by means of an insulated clamp. With his left hand he generally holds a mask or screen, furnished with very dark glass, through which he can safely watch the arc, which he ‘strikes' and holds between the tip of the rod and the seam which he is making. At the usual 30-50 volts the arc is perhaps a quarter of an inch (7 mm) long and results in the transference of metal from the end of the welding rod to a little pool of molten steel which the welder coaxes along the joint. The result is, or should be, a continuous run or ‘leg' of weld metal, about a quarter of an inch (7 mm) wide, which solidifies and bridges the joint. If a greater thickness of weld is needed, then the run must be repeated as many times as may be necessary.

If the weld has been properly made it is generally very strong and satisfactory, but any lack of skill or attention on the part of the welder is likely to result in defects, such as slag inclusions, which weaken the joint and are not readily seen by an inspector. It is also easy for a clumsy welder to overheat enough of the surrounding metal to cause serious distortions. This is especially the case where the work to be welded is heavy and thick; the welded engine-seatings in the pocket battleship Graf Spee, for instance, gave serious trouble from this cause.

In theory a welded joint in a tank or a ship should be completely watertight without further treatment, but this is seldom the case; in practice welded construction is likely to give more trouble than riveted work in this respect. A riveted lap joint is easily caulked by spreading the edges of the plates by means of a pneumatic chisel or caulking tool. This cannot be done with a welded joint, and the best way of dealing with the situation is to inject some kind of liquid sealing compound under pressure into the space between the two welds of a lap joint. All the same, I remember seeing much trouble in connection with the water-testing of compartments in welded warships.

Once upon a time I had the privilege of working for a few weeks as a riveter and also as a welder in one of the Royal Dockyards, and during this time I learnt various things which I do not think are in the text-books. Although closing a two-inch rivet in an armoured deck with a pneumatic hammer is both hard and noisy work, it is also curiously interesting, and most forms of riveting seemed to me to have at least some of the attraction of golf with the advantage of being more useful. A further sporting element was added by the operation of the inspection process; in those days we were paid at the rate of so much for every rivet closed, but five times so much was deducted for every rivet which was condemned by the inspector and had to be drilled out and replaced.

Riveting may not be heaven, but, by contrast, welding was certainly hell. Welding is amusing enough for the first hour or two -as I dare say hell may very possibly be – but after this the task of watching a hissing, flickering arc and a wretched little pool of molten metal becomes intolerably dull, and the dullness is not much relieved by the sparks and blobs of molten metal which find their way down one's neck and into one's shoes. After a very few days a feeling of boredom and bloody-mindedness settles in and it becomes very difficult to concentrate upon making a satisfactory weld.

Nowadays welds in tubing and in pressure vessels are made by automatic machines, which I suppose do not get bored, and so these welds are usually reliable. However, automatic welding is often impracticable in large structures like ships and bridges, where, in practice, the welding generally turns out to be very imperfect. Furthermore a welded joint provides little or no barrier to crack propagation, and this is one reason why so many large steel structures have failed catastrophically in recent years.

Creep

Homer knew that the first thing to do on getting your chariot out was to put the wheels on.

John Chadwick, The Decipherment of Linear B (Cambridge University Press, 1968)

The chariots of Mycenaean and archaic Greece had very light and flexible wheels, made from thin bent wood – willow or elm or cypress – usually with only four spokes (Figure 11). Such a construction was highly springy and resilient, and it seems to have enabled these vehicles to be galloped across the rough ground of the Greek hillsides, where a heavier and more rigid vehicle would have been useless. In fact, the rim of the wheel bent, rather like a bow, under the weight of the chariot, and, just as a bow must not be left strung for any length of time; so the weight must not be left on the wheels of a chariot. In the evening, therefore, one either tipped the vehicle vertically against a wall with the weight off the wheels, as Telemachus did in Book IV of the Odyssey, or else one took the wheels off altogether. Even on Mount Olympus the goddess Hebe had the morning chore of fitting the wheels to the chariot of grey-eyed Athene. With the much heavier wheels of later times such a procedure is less necessary and less practicable, although I understand that the wheels of the present Lord Mayor's coach are distinctly eccentric, presumably because the weight has been left on them for long periods.*

Figure 11. The Homeric chariot wheel was essentially flexible and made by bending quite thin wood. It could easily distort or' creep' under any prolonged load.

The distortion of bows and chariot wheels under prolonged loading is due to what the engineer calls ‘creep'. In elementary Hookean elasticity we assume, for simplicity, that if a material will sustain a stress at all, it will sustain it indefinitely, and also that the strains in a solid do not change with time, so long as the stress remains constant. In real materials neither of these assumptions is strictly true; nearly every substance will continue to extend or creep under a constant load with the passage of time.

The amount by which materials creep, however, varies a great deal. Among technological materials, wood and rope and concrete all creep very considerably and the effect has to be allowed for. Creep in textiles is one reason why our clothes go out of shape and the knees of trousers get baggy; it is, however much more pronounced in natural fibres, such as wool and cotton, than it is with the newer artificial fibres. This is why Terylene sails not only keep their shape but do not need to be carefully ‘stretched' when new, as had to be done with cotton and flax sails.

Figure 12. Typical time-creep curves for a material subjected to a series of constant stresses, sl, s2, s3... etc.

Creep in metals is generally less pronounced than it is in non-metals, and, although steel creeps significantly at high stresses and when heated, the effect can often be neglected when one is dealing with light loads at ordinary temperatures.

Creep in any material causes the stress to be redistributed in a manner which is often beneficial, since the more highly stressed parts creep the most. This is why old shoes are more comfortable than new ones. Thus the strength of a joint may improve with age if the stress concentrations are diminished. Naturally, if the load on the joint is reversed, creep may have the opposite effect and the joint may be weakened.

The effect of the distortions caused by creep is particularly conspicuous in old wooden structures. In buildings the roof often sags in a picturesque way, and old wooden ships are generally ‘hogged': the ends of the ship droop while the middle part rises. This is very noticeable in the gun-decks of H.M.S. Victory. With metals such as steel we generally notice the effects of creep when the springs of a car ‘sit down' and have to be replaced.

Although the amount of creep which is likely to occur varies greatly between different solids, the general pattern of behaviour is very much the same for nearly all materials. If we plot deformation or strain against the logarithm of time (which is a convenient way of contracting the time-scale) for the same material when subject to a series of constant stresses, s1 s2, s3 ... etc., we get a diagram very like Figure 12. It will be seen that there is a critical stress, s3 perhaps, below which the material will never break, however long it may be loaded. At stresses higher than s3 the material will not only distort with time but will also gradually progress to actual fracture and destruction, an effect we generally wish to avoid.

Soils, too, creep under load like other materials, and thus, unless we build upon rock or very hard ground, we need to watch the ·settlement' of foundations, which will usually need to be deeper for large buildings than for small. This is the reason for constructing large buildings on concrete ‘rafts'. Note the subsidence of the foundations of the arches of Clare bridge in Plate 7.

* * *

*Note that, if an ‘undrawn' nylon thread be cast into a block of ‘rigid' plastic, the thread can always be drawn out of the plastic by pulling on it, however long the thread may be. This is a good way of making long and complicated holes, for instance in wind-tunnel models, for pressure measurements.

*This is also true for the adhesion between metals and paint or enamel, including ‘vitreous enamel', i.e. glass. Before the days of modern extenso-meters, engineers used to judge the ‘yield-point' of hot-rolled steel by the load at which the ‘mill-scale', or black oxide film, cracked off the surface.

* This sort of thing is at the root of most of the stories about V.I.P.s being seasick when riding in state-coaches.

Chapter 8 Soft materials and living structures

-or how to design a worm

‘I'm very glad,' said Pooh happily, ‘ that I thought of giving you a Useful Pot to put things in.'

‘I'm very glad,' said Piglet happily,' that I thought of giving you Something to put in a Useful Pot.'

接合、铆接、焊接的应用分布 —— 蠕变和战车轮子

现在，我想给你讲一个故事，关于一艘在战时建造的船。它是一艘蒸汽轮船，木制结构，而且用的是优质木材，设计它的人也是优秀又能干的工匠……

它前进的样子就像一个人背负了过于沉重的包袱，不久便开始跌跌撞撞（只是小小的涌浪），然后它像一个被人踩踏的破旧板条箱，分崩离析了。5 分钟后，除了煤渣儿浮尘、木料，以及少数几个劫后余生者，什么都没剩下。

这是一个真实的故事，但我希望你注意到，这艘船是由木匠 —— 造房子的木匠或岸上的木匠 —— 建造的，而不是由船舶木工建造的。

—— 威斯顿·马特，《南太水手》

威斯顿·马特故事里的那艘蒸汽轮船意外沉没了，因为那些本该将木料连接在一起的接合处太弱了，虽然建造它的房屋木匠 —— 在他们自己的行当里都是老实人 —— 想必对这些接合处很满意。事实上，当一个岸上的木匠建造房子或组装传统家具时，他构造的接合处在船舶建造师或工程师看来，不仅脆弱而且效率很低。这些接合处确实脆弱，但它们是否「低效」则取决于它们的用途。房屋建造者的目的可能和船舶或飞机制造者完全不同。

或许，工程师在绝大多数情况下会假定，「有效」的结构指的是它的每一个零件和每一个接合处都恰好强劲到足以应付它必须承受的载荷，而且对于给定的强度，材料的用量最小，重量也最小。理论上，这样一个结构在任一部位发生断裂的概率是均等的，它也可能像「单驾马车」那样，各处同时断裂。为了实现这种效率，工程师需要高度警惕，因为设计或制造中即便是最小的失误也会带来危险的弱点。

当然，这种结构的近似物是存在的，尤其是在船舶、飞机等以减重为要务的机械中。然而，这代表了看待效率问题的一种过度专业化的方式，它没有考虑对刚性的需求，更不用说对经济性的需求了。单驾马车型结构有时是必要的，但对建造和维护来说，它们总是费用高昂。追求结构完美的减重措施，是导致太空旅行如此奢侈的因素之一。按寻常的标准考虑可能的可用空间成本（以每立方米计），一艘小船约为一栋普通房子的 20 倍，而飞行器的空间成本还要更高。

相较于那些花哨的结构，建筑师和工匠更偏爱有实用意义的结构。毕竟房屋已经够贵了，而且这些人非常清楚，在绝大多数普遍或固定的生活设施中，影响结构设计的更多是刚度，而非强度。

的确，对强度和刚度的需求是比较重要的，这其实是关于结构的成本和效率问题的根源所在。当首要需求为刚性而非强度时，整个问题就变得更容易，成本也就更低了。这种情况常见于家具、地板、楼梯和建筑物，以及炉灶、冰箱、多种工具、重型机械和汽车的某些部件。这些东西不会经常发生断裂，但若我们把材料做得更薄些，其挠度、弯曲度和总的变形程度就会马上变得不可接受。因此，为了达到足够的刚性，各个部位通常要足够厚，才能使其应力足够小，这在工程师看来十分荒谬。

由此可知，在这种结构中，即便材料中遍布缺陷和应力集中，可能也没什么大不了。此外，接合处的强度不大可能是决定性的；在多数情况下，几根钉子就完全够用了。当然，这是大部分直觉性设计方案的基础。很多人从未听过胡克定律或杨氏模量，但他们凭借经验和常识差不多就能估算出桌子或鸡笼的刚度，而且若这类东西制作得足够结实，它们也不大可能在普通的日常载荷作用下发生断裂。

此外，某些接合处有一点儿「妥协」可能也没什么坏处，在传统结构中这种情况可能更常见，而不是在精细的结构中。原因之一是，一定量的柔性可使载荷以有益的方式均匀分布。家具确实不常发生断裂，但如果你试图弄坏座椅，一个好办法就是坐在椅子上，让椅子的三条腿落在地毯上，第四条腿则落在光秃秃的地板上。对传统家具而言，借助榫接合处的形变，载荷可以分散到全部四条腿上；对于现代工厂用「高效」的胶接合方式制造的座椅，这些接合处可能会断裂，之后座椅也很难修复如初。

鼓励接合处具有一定柔性的另一个原因是，木材（有时还有其他材料）会随天气改变其尺寸。木材横纹方向的收缩率和膨胀率可达 5%，甚至 10%。传统的细木工手艺借助「低效」的开口接合方式来留出余地。我在剑桥大学的丘吉尔学院有一张崭新的上等宴会高桌，它是用最优质和最昂贵的木材制成的，木材又是以强劲、刚性的科学接合方式组合在一起的。几个月后，在用科学方法加热的大厅里，这张桌子因收缩而从中间裂开了。那不是一条不起眼的细小裂纹，而是好几码 [1] 长的裂缝，能为一大堆正常或标准直径的豌豆提供安身之处。

靠得住的接合方式与靠不住的人

许多挠变可控的农用结构在恰当的地方是完全没问题的，但一旦开始有减重、强度和机动性方面的要求，就可能会遭遇各种各样的困难，尤其是当关乎不同部位间接合方式的可靠性时。历史上，这一直是建造船舶及风力和水力磨坊的工匠面临的最严重的问题。建造船舶和磨坊的传统工匠的了不起的手艺，在某种程度上是将足够安全的强度和为木料「工作」而预留的些许柔性结合起来。更早时候的造船工匠在柔性方面吃过亏，尽管他们造的船经常漏水严重，但却极少在海上破裂。生产可能会散架的木制船舶，对现代战时政府的管理能力提出了要求。

船舶和飞机的接合故障是两次世界大战的一个显著特征。「一战」期间，美国人建造了大量木制船舶，既有蒸汽动力船也有风帆动力船，用的大多是非正统的制造方法，其中许多艘都破裂了。第二次世界大战期间，他们制造了更多的钢制焊接蒸汽轮船，其中破裂的比例更高，无论是航行在海上还是停泊在港口内。两次世界大战期间，英国制造了大量的木制飞机，它们似乎总出现这种或那种接合故障。

飞机出现这种情况完全不足为奇，因为我在不同的场合，而且就在主体结构内性命攸关的胶接合处，有了以下发现：

1. 一把剪刀。

2. 一本急救手册（口袋本）。

3. 根本没有胶。

大体上，我认为这些事故中的大部分都不是由智力低下或不正常的人造成的；责任往往都在普通人身上，这才是麻烦所在。固然人们总有感到疲倦或厌烦的时候，但我认为问题的根源还要深得多。在结构接合方面，有过成功或失败尝试的人，只有极少数会亲身经历这样一种情况，即接合故障导致人员伤亡事故；虽然他们全都在建造橱柜和园艺棚子等方面经验丰富，但其中的接合强度其实无关紧要。我们要尽一切努力说服他们，粗制滥造的接合方式在道德上等同于过失杀人；但从深厚的民俗传统看来，我们这样纯属小题大做，况且强度本身就是个无聊的话题。如果有可能，在实践中好好检查一下接合处，就没什么问题了。

近些年来，金属之间的高效黏合剂已被开发出来，它们有许多可靠的技术优点，前提是接合处要精工细作。不幸的是，它们在现代飞机上的应用被一个已证实的事实所妨碍，即有必要找个专门的检验员来监督每个负责接合工作的工人的实际表现，还得有监督检验员的检验员。自然，这些安排都是非常昂贵的。尽管如此，据说黏合剂在现代的金属制飞机上的应用与日俱增。

接合处的应力分布

因为接合处的功能是将载荷从结构的一个单元传递到其邻近单元上，所以应力会以某种方式从材料中的某处摆脱出来，然后置身于毗邻的部分，但这个过程却极有可能导致高度的应力集中及随之而来的弱化。尽管如此，在少数顺利的情境中，应力仍可能会均匀地从一个零件穿过接合处到达另一个零件，而且伴随的应力集中极少，甚至没有。木料上的胶粘斜嵌接合（见图 7–1）和金属上的对头焊接（见图 7–2）就属于这种情况。

图 7–1 木料上的胶粘斜嵌接合

图 7–2 金属上的对头焊接

但是，运用斜嵌接合或对头焊接并非总能行得通，两块相邻木板或金属板间某种形式的搭叠接合可能更为常见。这种几何结构会立刻引发应力集中，且就「刚性」的搭叠接合而言，它和胶粘、钉板、螺钉、焊接、螺栓或铆接接合没有多大区别。在所有这些情况中，大部分载荷都转移到了接合处的两端（见图 7–3）。

图 7–3 搭叠接合处的载荷转移

基于这个原因，这类接合的强度主要取决于其宽度，少许受制于零件间重叠的长度。因此，在两个金属片间，铆接和焊接是最简单、常见、有效的形式（见图 7–4 和图 7–5），并且即便变得复杂，也不需要改进。

图 7–4 铆搭接合

图 7–5 焊搭接合

通常，我们想为承张的棒或杆加上某种锚座或实心锚具作为端接附件；在这里，类似的考虑也适用，只有一处应力集中的情况除外，它通常发生在杆进入锚座的那一点上（见图 7–6）。例如，若把杆拧入锚具，则几乎所有载荷都会被前面两三个螺纹分走，而锚座内其他额外的杆长就没什么作用了。因此，一只画眉鸟从草坪上拉出一只虫的难度，并不取决于虫子的长度；拉出一只短的虫子和拉出一只长的虫子是一样难的。[2]

图 7–6

图 7–6 所示的应力分布适用于接合的两部分具有近似杨氏模量的情况，这通常发生在金属与金属接合的时候。它还适用于杆或承张棒的刚度低于锚座或锚具材料的情况，虫子和草坪就属于这种情况。然而，如果杆或棒实质上比用来锚定它的材料更强劲，应力分布的情况则可能会逆转，主要集中在杆或插件的底端或内端（见图 7–7）。

图 7–7 张力作用下插件的载荷转移

当然，在实践中，两种情况可能会同等地弱化接合。或许，插件与其周边材料的杨氏模量间存在一个比例，能给出一个最佳的接合处应力分布；但是，即使有这样一个比例，在现实生活中也很难模拟出来。

有一次，我想制作强化塑料机翼和金属机身间的点接合附件。虽然我应该完全清楚应力集中、草坪上的虫子之类的情况，但我还是愚蠢地从模铸强钢缆着手，将磨损的末端 —— 像树根一样 —— 插入了塑料主体。当我把这个欠考虑的样品装到测试仪器上时，在非常低的负载下，钢丝被拉出了塑料，并伴随着一连串破裂引发的噪声。

在下一个实验中，我用像剑一样的锥形钢片或钢尖取代钢缆，并涂上适量的黏合剂后将其经模铸插入塑料机翼结构（见图 7–8）。这一次，测试样品又失败了，且随之而来的不是一连串噪声，而是一声巨响，但仍是在同样低的负载下。

图 7–8 钢制插件的错误示范，这种接合方式很脆弱

在停下来反思并深究虫子的情况之后，我们又尝试了一系列短而宽的铲状钢插件，如图 7–9 所示。所有这些样品在极高的负载下才会失效，而且与「铲」的宽度成正比。依靠这种设计，我们能用相当小的钢制配件从塑料结构中分走大约 40~50 吨的载荷。

图 7–9 钢制插件的正确示范，这种接合要强劲得多

这类接合方式完全依靠金属和塑料间的黏附，因此必须一丝不苟地模铸，还得有适当的检验。它们也必须经过精心设计，因为在所有这类情况中，一旦金属达到其屈服点并丧失弹性行为，金属和非金属间的黏附就会完全失效。[3] 因为金属中的应力比我们的预期可能要高得多，所以通常需要用高抗拉钢来制作插件，还要小心地进行热处理。此外，钢制插件的「后缘」必须被磨得很锋利，就像凿子一样。

铆接

「不管怎么说，我还是起到了一点儿作用。」龙骨翼板得意地说道。他的确做到了，整个船底都更轻松了。

「那么是我们不顶用了。」船底的铆钉哭诉道，「我们被要求 —— 我们被要求 —— 永不退让；我们要是退让了，海水就会灌进来，我们全都得沉没！最初，所有糟心事都赖到我们头上，而现在我们完成任务后，连一丝安慰都得不到。」

「别说是我跟你们讲的，」蒸汽低声安慰道，「但在你们、我以及我来自的最后一团云雾之间，它注定会发生，只是早晚而已。你们不得不退让一点儿，而且你们已经不自觉地退让了。现在要挺住，像从前一样。」

—— 鲁德亚德·吉卜林，《自我觉醒的船》

钢制结构中的铆接已经不流行了，主要是因为它们很昂贵，还有一部分原因是它们一般比焊接更笨重。这其实是个遗憾，因为铆接也有一些优点。铆接可靠且易于检验，在大型结构中，它在某种程度上起到了阻止断裂的作用：如果一条大而强的格里菲斯裂缝开始扩展，即便并非万无一失，它通常也可能被铆接处的沟槽或间断阻止或延迟。

更重要的是，铆接能略微滑动进而重新分配载荷，由此规避了应力集中的后果，而这是所有接合处的头号公敌。这个过程被永远地记录在《自我觉醒的船》一书中，早在英格利斯和格里菲斯之前的很多年，吉卜林对结构中应力集中和裂缝问题的感性认识就已经非常了不起了；他的一些有关结构的故事或许应该成为工科生的必读书。

每个铆钉都能非常轻微地滑动，应力集中最糟糕的效应可能会由此减弱，故而用几个铆钉把搭叠接合处串起来可能是值得的，因为端接铆钉的滑动能力足以使中间的部分发挥一些作用。当钢板或铁板间的新铆接使其自身承受合理的载荷分布时，锈蚀就有机会发挥其积极作用了。腐蚀产物、氧化铁和羟化物会扩展从而锁住接合处，防止它们在载荷反转时前后滑动。此外，锈蚀可以像胶一样传递板材间的剪切作用，因此铆搭接合的强度通常会随时间增加。

当我们在像船舶和锅炉这样的大型钢制结构上进行铆孔作业时，冲压钻孔是常用的方法。虽然这是一种快捷且廉价的钢材制孔方法，但它并不尽如人意，因为孔洞边缘的金属处于脆性状态，也常常含有细小的裂缝。由于该区域肯定会有应力集中，所以这种情形不太好。基于这个原因，在高级加工过程中，通常是先钻出小于规格尺寸的孔洞，再将之扩大。虽然这样做增加了开支，但也大大提升了接合处的强度和可靠性。

铆接处和栓接处都可被做成不同的形状和尺寸，但宽泛地讲，所有这些接合都有三种失效的方式（见图 7–10）：（a）铆钉自身滑脱或折断；（b）铆钉被从板材上扯下（铆孔「承力」或延伸）；（c）铆钉间的一块承张板材被撕裂，就像撕掉一枚邮票那样。

图 7–10 铆接处可能失效的三种原因

我们通常需要借助适当的计算来检查上述每一种方式导致铆接处失效的可能性。但是，铆接设计的「法则」是由劳埃德银行和英国贸易部等机构制定的，你在几乎所有工程手册中都能翻到。

焊接

各种各样的焊接广泛应用于今天的钢铁制品，主要是因为焊接方式通常比铆接更便宜，还因为焊接使强度增加而重量则有所减少。在船舶上也是这样，吃水线下铆钉头的缺席可以减少一小部分阻力。

最精细的焊接方法是电弧焊。在这个过程中，焊接工人右手持一个绝缘钳，并用它夹住一根金属条，即焊条；他的左手通常会拿一个面罩或遮板，装有深黑的玻璃，透过玻璃他能安全地观察在焊条末端和他制造出来的焊缝之间时而「罢工」时而持续的电弧。通常在 30~50 伏特的电压下，电弧大约有英寸（约 7 毫米）长，它会使焊条末端的金属迁移到焊接工人沿接合处弄出的一小滩钢水里。其结果是（或者应该是），焊接金属的一条连续跑道或「径迹」—— 大约有英寸（7 毫米）宽 —— 凝固并桥接。如果需要更粗的焊缝，那么必须视情况重复进行几遍。

如果你能恰当地制作出焊缝来，它通常会非常强劲且符合要求，但对焊接工人而言，任何技艺或注意力的疏失都可能会导致缺陷，比如夹渣，这会削弱接合且不容易被检验员发现。对一个笨手笨脚的焊接工人来说，周边金属过热也容易导致严重变形，尤其是在要焊接的工件既重又厚的情况下。例如，小型战列舰施佩伯爵号上的焊接发动机座就因此造成了大麻烦。

理论上，坦克或船舶上的焊接处应该无须进一步处理就能做到完全防水，但这种情况极其罕见；实践中，焊接构造在这方面可能会比铆接工件带来更多的麻烦。铆搭接合容易被填塞，因为气动凿或填缝工具可以扩展板材的边缘。而焊接则没办法做到这一点，处理这种情况的最好办法就是向搭叠接合两条焊缝间的空隙注入某种承压的液态密封剂。尽管如此，我记得自己见过焊接战舰上隔舱水压测试遭遇的许多麻烦。

我曾经有幸在英国皇家造船厂当了几个星期的铆工兼焊工，其间我学到了各种各样课本里没有的东西。虽然在装甲甲板上用气动锤封合两英寸的铆钉是项既艰难又吵闹的工作，但也非常有趣，对我来说，多数铆接形式看起来至少有些打高尔夫球的魅力，还兼具更有用的优点。检验过程的操作进一步增添了竞技元素；在那些日子里，我们的报酬是按每封合一个铆钉多少钱来计算的，但若被检验员判定为不合格，则必须起出铆钉并替换，每个要罚 5 倍的钱。

铆接可能不是天堂，但相比之下，焊接一定是地狱。在头一两个小时内，焊接是非常有趣的 —— 我敢说地狱很可能也是这样。但此后，盯着嘶嘶作响、飘忽不定的电弧和一摊少得可怜的熔融金属，这份差事乏味到让人难以忍受的程度，熔融金属溅起的火星或液滴钻进衣领、飞入鞋子，但这并不能消除多少枯燥的感觉。几天后，无聊和难受的感觉充斥心头，你便很难集中精力制造出一条令人满意的焊缝。

如今，管材和压力容器中的焊缝都是用自动化机械完成的，我想机器应该不会感到无聊，故而这些焊缝一般是可靠的。但是，自动焊接方式在船舶和桥梁等大型结构上常常是行不通的，其实践结果非常糟糕。此外，焊接极少或不会阻止裂缝的扩展，这也是近年来这么多大型钢制结构发生灾难性事故的原因之一。

蠕变

荷马明白，要把你的战车开出去，第一要务便是装上轮子。

—— 约翰·查德威克（John Chadwick），

《B 类线形文字解读》（The Decipherment of Linear B）

迈锡尼文明和古风时期的希腊战车有非常轻巧且柔性的轮子，它们是由薄曲木材 —— 柳木、榆木或柏木 —— 制成的，通常只有 4 根辐条（见图 7–11）。这样一种构造具有高度的弹性和回弹性，似乎能让这些战车穿越希腊的崎岖山地，而一辆更重且更具刚性的车则无能为力。事实上，轮子的边缘会在战车重量的作用下像一张弓那样弯曲，正如一张弓肯定不能任意长时间地处于上弦状态，战车的重量肯定也不能一直作用于轮子。于是到了晚上，士兵们要么把车翻过来径直靠在墙上使轮子不再承重，就像《奥德赛》第四卷里特勒马科斯做的那样，要么把车轮全部卸下来。即便在奥林匹斯山上，女神赫柏也得在早晨为灰眼雅典娜的战车装上轮子。后世的车轮重得多，发展到这一步既没有必要也不大实用，我理解现在市长大人的马车轮子之所以明显是偏心轮，想必是长期承重所致。[4]

图 7–11 荷马时代的战车轮子本质上是柔性的，并且是通过弄弯相当薄的木材制成的。在任意长时间的负载下，它容易发生扭曲或「蠕变」

在负载的长时间作用下弓和战车轮子的扭曲，都要归因于工程师所说的「蠕变」。在基本的胡克弹性中，为简便起见，我们假定若材料能承受应力，便会无限期地维持，我们还假定只要应力保持不变，固体中的应变就不会随时间改变。对真实的材料而言，这些假定都不是严格成立的，几乎每一种材料在恒定的负载下都会随时间的推移而持续延展或蠕变。

然而，材料的蠕变量差别很大。在工艺材料中，木材、绳索和混凝土都有很大的蠕变，必须考虑其效应。纺织物中的蠕变是导致我们的衣服变形或裤子膝盖处变宽松的原因之一，但是，这在羊毛和棉等天然纤维里要比在更新的人造纤维中显著得多。因此，涤纶帆不仅能保持形状，在刚做出来时也不需要仔细地「撑拉」，而棉帆和亚麻帆的情况正好相反。

金属中的蠕变通常不像非金属那么显著，虽然钢材在高应力和加热情况下的蠕变值得注意，但当面对的是常温下的轻微载荷时，其效应经常可以忽略不计。

任意材料中的蠕变常常会使应力以有益的方式重新分配，因为应力较高的部位蠕变最大，这就是为什么旧鞋子比新鞋子穿着更舒服。若应力集中减少，接合的强度就会随时间提高。如果接合处的载荷反转，蠕变就可能产生相反的效应，接合处则可能被弱化。

蠕变导致的扭曲效应，在老式木制结构中尤其明显。在木制建筑物中，屋顶经常以古色古香的方式下凹，老式木制船舶则往往会「拱起」：船的两头下垂而中间部分升起。在英国皇家海军胜利号的炮台上，这一现象非常明显。对于钢材等金属的蠕变效应，我们常常是在汽车弹簧「一坐不起」而必须更换时才注意到它。

虽然不同固体间的蠕变量可能千差万别，但几乎所有材料的一般行为模式都差不多。在承受一系列恒定应力 s1、s2、s3…… 的条件下，如果我们为同一材料绘制形变或应变对时间对数（缩小计时数值的简便方式）的图像，就会得到一张类似于图 7–12 的图。显然，存在一个临界应力 s3，在低于该应力时，不管负载时间有多长，材料可能永远也不会断裂。在比 s3 大的应力作用下，材料不仅会随时间扭曲，还会逐渐发展为实际的断裂和损坏，这是我们通常避之唯恐不及的后果。

图 7–12 在承受一系列恒定应力 s1、s2、s3…… 的条件下，材料的典型时间–蠕变曲线

像其他材料一样，泥土负载时也会发生蠕变，因此，除非是在岩石或非常硬的地面上搭建建筑物，否则我们都需要观察地基的「沉降」，大型建筑物通常比小型建筑物沉降得更深。这就是在混凝土「筏基」上构筑大型建筑物的原因。注意插图 7 中克莱尔桥的桥基的沉降。

[1] 1 码≈0.91 米。—— 编者注

[2] 注意，如果把一条「卷曲」的尼龙线熔入一大块「刚性」塑料中，你总能对其施加拉力，把它从塑料里拉出来，不管它有多长。这是一种制造既长又复杂的孔洞的好办法，例如风洞模型中用来测量压力的孔洞。

[3] 金属和涂料或釉质之间的黏合 —— 包括「透明釉」，即玻璃 —— 也是如此。在现代引伸计被发明之前，工程师们常常根据表面剥落的「磨麟」或黑氧化膜上的载荷判定热轧钢的「屈服点」。

[4] 据说达官贵人在乘坐国家礼宾马车时会晕车，原因也在于此。
