# 参考文献

Abbott, Andrew. 1983. “Professional Ethics.” American Journal of Sociology 88:855–885.

Abend, Gabriel. 2014. The Moral Background: An Inquiry into the History of Busness Ethics. Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Aberle, D. F., A. K. Cohen, A. K. Davis, M. J. Levy Jr., and F. X. Sutton. 1950. “The Functional Prerequisites of a Society.” Ethics 60(2): 100–111.

Aghion Philippe, yann Algan, Pierre Cahuc, and Andrei Shleifer. 2010. “Regulation and Distrust.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 125: 1015–1049.

Amsden, Alice. 1989. Asia’s Next Giant: South Korea and Late Industrialization.oxford: oxford University Press.

Anderson, Ronald C., and David M. Reeb. 2003. “Founding-Family ownership and Firm Performance: Evidence from the S&P 500.” The Journal of Financ 58:1301–1328.

Ardener, Shirley. 1964. “The Comparative Study of Rotating Credit Associations.”Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute 94: 202–229.

Arrow, Kenneth. 1974. The Limits of Organization New york: W.W. Norton.

Arthur, W. Brian. 1989. “Competing Technologies and Lock-In by Historical Events.” Economic Journal 99: 116–131.

Atran, Scott, and Robert Axelrod. 2008. “Reframing Sacred Values.” NegotiationJournal 24(3 July): 221–246.

Avent-Holt, Dustin. 2012. “The Political Dynamics of Marketorganization: Cultural Framing, Neoliberalism, and the Case of Airline Deregulation.” Sociological Theor 30: 283–302.

Bachrach, Peter, and Morton Baratz. 1962. “The Two Faces of Power.”AmericanPolitical Science Review 56: 947–952.

Baldwin, Carliss, and Kim Clark. 2000. Design Rules, Volume 1, The Power of Moularity. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Banfield, Edward. 1958.The Moral Basis of a Backward Society New york: The Free Press.

Barabasi, Albert-Laszlo. 2002. Linked: How Everything Is Connected to Everything Else. New york: Perseus.

Barnard, Chester. 1938. The Functions of the Executive Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Baron, James, Frank Dobbin, and P. Deveraux Jennings. 1986. “War and Peace: The Evolution of Modern Personnel Administration in U.S. Industry.” AmericanJournal of Sociology 92: 350–383.

Barth, Fredrik. 1967. “Economic Spheres in Darfur.” In Themes in Economic Anthrpology, edited by Raymond Firth. London: Tavistock.

Baum, Joel, Andrew Shipilov, and Tim Rowley. 2003. “Where Do Small Worlds Come From?” Industrial and Corporate Change 12: 697–725.

Bebchuk, Lucian, and Mark Roe. 2004. “A Theory of Path Dependence in Corporate ownership and Governance.” pp. 69–113 in Convergence and Persistence inCorporate Governance, edited by Jeffrey Gordon and Mark Roe. Newyork:Cambridge University Press.

Becht, Marco, and J. Bradford deLong. 2007. “Why Has There Been So Little Blocholding in America?” pp. 613–666 in A History of Corporate Governance around the World: Family Business Groups to Professional Managers, edited by RandallMorck. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Becker, Gary. 1976. The Economic Approach to Human Behavior Cambridge, MA:Harvard University Press.

Ben-Porath, yoram. 1980. “The F-Connection: Families, Friends, and Firms in the organization of Exchange.” Population and Development Review 6: 1–30.

Bendix, Reinhard. 1956. Work and Authority in Industry. New york: Wiley.

Bendor, Jonathan, and Piotr Swistak. 2001. “The Evolution of Norms.”AmericanJournal of Sociology 106: 1493–1545.

Benedict, Ruth. 1946. The Chrysanthemum and the Sword: Patterns of Japanese Cuture. Boston: Houghton-Miffli

Bennedsen, Morten, Casper Nielsen, Francisco Perez-Gonzalez, and Daniel Wolfenzon. 2007. “Inside the Family Firm: The Role of Families in Succession Decisions and Performance.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 122: 647–691.

Bennedsen, Morten, Joseph P. H. Fan, Ming Jian, and yin-Hua yeh. 2015. “The Family Business Map: Framework, Selective Survey, and Evidence from Chinese Family Firm Succession.” Journal of Corporate Finance 33: 212–226.

Berger, Peter and Thomas Luckmann. 1966.The Social Construction of Reality: ATreatise in the Sociology of Knowledge. Garden City, Ny: Doubleday.

Berle, A. A., and G. Means. 1932. The Modern Corporation and Private Property.New york: Macmillan.

Bewley, Truman. 1999. Why Wages Don’t Fall during a Recession. Cambridge, MA:Harvard University Press.

Biernacki, Richard. 1997. The Fabrication of Labor: Germany and Britain 1640 1914. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.

Biggart, Nicole, and Mauro Guillen. 1999. “Developing Difference: Socialorganization and the Rise of the Auto Industries of South Korea, Taiwan, Spain, and Argentina.” American Sociological Review 64: 722–747.

Blau, Peter. 1964. Exchange and Power in Social Life. New york: Wiley.

Bloch, Marc. [1939] 1961. Feudal Society. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Blumer, Herbert. 1969. Symbolic Interactionism: Perspective and Method. Berkeley,CA: University of California Press.

Bohannan, Paul, and George Dalton, editors. 1962. Markets in Africa. Evanston, IL:Northwestern University Press.

Boltanski, Luc, and Laurent Thévenot. 1999. “The Sociology of Critical Capacity.European Journal of Social Theor 2: 359–377.

———. 2006. On Justification: Economies of Worth translated by C. Porter. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Bonacich, Philip. 1987. “Power and Centrality: A Family of Measures.” AmericanJournal of Sociology 92(5): 1170–1182.

Boorman, Scott A. 1975. “A Combinatorial optimization Model for Transmission of Job Information through Social Networks.” Bell Journal of Economics 6: 216–249.

Burawoy, Michael. 1979. Manufacturing Consent: Changes in the Labor Process under Monopoly Capitalism. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Burt, Ronald S. 1992. Structural Holes: The Social Structure of Competition Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

———. 2002. “Bridge Decay.” Social Networks 24: 333–363.

———. 2005. Brokerage and Closure: An Introduction to Social Capital. New york:oxford University Press.

Business History Review. 2010. “‘Varieties of Capitalism’ Roundtable.” 84: 637–674.

Camic, Charles. 1979. “The Utilitarians Revisited.”American Journal of Sociology 85: 515–550.

Carruthers, Bruce. 1996. City of Capital: Politics and Markets in the English Financial Revolution. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

———. 2013. “From Uncertainty Toward Risk: The Case of Credit Ratings.”Socio-Economic Review 11(3): 525–551.

Castilla, Emilio, Hokyu Hwang, Mark Granovetter, and Ellen Granovetter. 2000.“Social Networks in Silicon Valley.” pp. 218–247 in The Silicon Valley Edge edited by C.-M. Lee, W. Miller, M. Hancock, and H. Rowen. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.

Chandler, Alfred. 1962. Strategy and Structure. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

———. 1977. The Visible Hand: The Managerial Revolution in American Business Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Chang, Dukjin. 1999. “Privately owned Social Structures: Institutionalization Network Contingency in the Korean Chaebol.” Ph.D. dissertation, Department of Sociology, University of Chicago.

Chang, Sea-jin. 2003. Financial Crisis and Transformation of Korean Business Groups: The Rise and Fall of Chaebols New york: Cambridge University Press.

Chase, Ivan. 1974. “Models of Hierarchy Formation in Animal Societies.” Behavioral Science 19(6): 374–382.

———. 1980. “Social Process and Hierarchy Formation in Small Groups: A Comparative Perspective.” American Sociological Review 40(4: August): 905–924.

Christensen, Clayton. 1997. The Innovator’s Dilemma: The Revolutionary Book Th Will Change the Way You Do Business. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Business School Press.

Christensen, Johan. 2013. “Bureaucracies, Tax Reform, and Neoliberal Ideas in New Zealand and Ireland.” Governance 26(4): 563–584.

———. 2017. The Power of Economists within the State Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.

Chu, Johan, and Gerald Davis. 2015. “Who Killed the Inner Circle: The Decline of the American Corporate Interlock Network.” SSRN paper uploaded october 23, 2015: http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2061113.Forthcoming, American Journal of Sociology.

Chung, Chi-Nien. 2000. “Markets, Culture and Institutions: The Formation and Transformation of Business Groups in Taiwan, 1960s–1990s.” Doctoral dissertation, Department of Sociology, Stanford University, Stanford, CA.

Coase, Ronald. 1960. “The Problem of Social Cost.”Journal of Law and Economics 3: 1–44.

Cole, Robert. 1979. Work, Mobility and Participation: A Comparative Study of American and Japanese Industry. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.

Coleman, James. 1990. The Foundations of Social Theor Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Colfer, Lyra, and Carliss Baldwin. 2016. “The Mirroring Hypothesis: Theory, Edence, and Exceptions.” Working paper 16-124, Harvard Business School.

Collins, Randall. 1980. The Credential Society: A Historical Sociology of Education and Stratification.New york: Academic Press.

Cook, Karen, and Richard Emerson. 1978. “Power, Equity, and Commitment in Exchange Networks.” American Sociological Review 43: 721–739.

Cook, Karen, Richard Emerson, and Mary Gillmore. 1983. “The Distribution of Power in Exchange Networks: Theory and Experimental Results.”AmericanJournal of Sociology 89(2): 275–305.

Cook, Karen, and Russell Hardin. 2001. “Norms of Cooperativeness and Networks of Trust.” pp. 327–347 in Social Norms, edited by M. Hechter and K.-D. opp.New york: Russell Sage Foundation.

Cook, Karen, and Eric R. W. Rice. 2001. “Exchange and Power: Issues of Structure and Agency.” pp. 699–719 in Handbook of Sociological Theor, edited by Jonathan Turner. New york: Kluwer Academic/Plenum Publishers.

Cook, Karen, and Russell Hardin. 2001. “Norms of Cooperativeness and Networks of Trust.” pp. 327–347 in Social Norms, edited by M. Hechter and K.-D. opp.New york: Russell Sage Foundation.

———. 2003. “Social Exchange Theory.” Chapter 3 inHandbook of Social Psychology,edited by J. Delamater. New york: Kluwer / Plenum.

Cook, Karen S., Russell Hardin, and Margaret Levi. 2005. New york: The Russell Sage Foundation.

Cook, Karen S., Margaret Levi, and Russell Hardin, editors. 2009. Whom Can WeTrust?: How Groups, Networks, and Institutions Make Trust Possible. New york:The Russell Sage Foundation

Cooter, Robert. 2000. “Economic Analysis of Internalized Norms.” “Economic Analysis of Internalized Norms.” Virginia Law Review 86: 1577–1601.

Crenson, Matthew. 1971. The Un-Politics of Air Pollution: A Study of Non-Decisiomaking in the Cities. Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins Press

Cushman, Fiery, Liane young, and Joshua Greene. 2010. “Multi-System Moral Psychology.” pp. 47–71 in The Moral Psychology Handbook,edited by John Doris.oxford: oxford University Press.

David, Paul. 1986. “Understanding the Necessity of QWERTy: The Necessity of History.” pp. 30–49 in Economic History and the Modern Economist, edited byW. N. Parker. London: Blackwell.

Davis, Gerald. 2009a. “The Rise and Fall of Finance and the End of the Society of organizations.” Academy of Management Perspectives August: 27–44.

———. 2009b. Managed by the Markets: How Finance Re-shaped America. Newyork: oxford University Press.

Davis, Gerald, Mina yoo, and Wayne Baker. 2003. “The Small World of the Ameican Corporate Elite, 1982–2001.” Strategic Organization 3: 301–326.

Deane, Phyllis. 1978. The Evolution of Economic Ideas Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.

de Nooy, Wouter, Andrej Mrvar, and Vladimir Batagelj. 2011. Exploratory SocialNetwork Analysis with Pajek. 2nd ed. New york: Cambridge University Press.

Dewey, John. 1939. Theory of Valuation Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

DiMaggio, Paul. 1997. “Culture and Cognition.” Annual Review of Sociology 23:263–287.

DiMaggio, Paul, and Walter Powell. 1983. “The Iron Cage Revisited: Institutional Isomorphism and Collective Rationality in organizational Fields.” AmericanSociological Review 48: 147–160.

Dobbin, Frank. 1994. Forging Industrial Policy: The United States, Britain and France in the Railway Age. New york: Cambridge University Press.

Dodds, Peter S., R. Muhamad, and D. S. Watts. 2003. “An Experimental Study of Search in Global Social Networks.” Science 301(5634): 827–829.

Domhoff. G. William. 2013.Who Rules America? The Triumph of the Corporate Rich. 7th ed. New york: McGraw Hill.

Dumont, Louis. 1977. From Mandeville to Marx: The Genesis and Triumph of Ecnomic Ideology. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Durkheim, Emile. [1893] 1984. The Division of Labor in Society,translated by W. D.

Easley, David, and Jon Kleinberg. 2010. Networks, Crowds, and Markets: Reasoningabout a Highly Connected World. New york: Cambridge University Press.

Eggertsson, Thrain. 2001. “Norms in Economics, with Special Reference to Ecnomic Development.” pp. 76–104 in Norms, edited by M. Hechter and K.-D.opp. New york: Russell Sage Foundation.

Eisenstadt, Shmuel. 1963. The Political Systems of Empires: The Rise and Fall of th Historical Bureaucratic Societies. New york: The Free Press

Eisenstadt, Shmuel N., and Luis Roniger. 1984. Patrons, Clients, and Friends: Interpersonal Relations and the Structure of Trust in Society. New york: Cambridge University Press.

Ellickson, Robert. 1991. Order without Law: How Neighbors Settle Disputes. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

———. 1998. “Law and Economics Discovers Social Norms.” Journal of Legal Studies 27: 537–552.

———. 2001. “The Evolution of Social Norms: A Perspective from the Legal Academy.” pp. 35–75 in Social Norms, edited by M. Hechter and K.-D. opp.New york: Russell Sage Foundation.

Elster, Jon. 1983. Explaining Technical Change. New york: Cambridge University Press.

———. 1989a. The Cement of Society: A Study of Social Order New york: Cambridge University Press.

———. 1989b. “Social Norms and Economic Theory.”Journal of Economic Perspectives 3: 99–117.

———. 1990. “Norms of Revenge.” Ethics 100: 862–885.

———. 1999. Alchemies of the Mind: Rationality and the Emotions. Cambridge, UK:Cambridge University Press.

———. 2000. “Rational Choice History: A Case of Excessive Ambition.” AmericanPolitical Science Review 94(3: September): 685–695.

Emerson, Richard. 1962. “Power-Dependence Relations.” American SociologicalReview 27: 31–41.

Esherick, Joseph, Paul Pickowicz, and Andrew Walder, editors. 2006. The ChineseCultural Revolution as History. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.

Espeland, Wendy, and Mitchell Stevens. 1998. “Commensuration as a Social Process.” Annual Review of Sociology 24: 313–343.

Evans, Peter. 1995. Embedded Autonomy: States and Industrial Transformation.Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Farrell, Henry. 2009. The Political Economy of Trust: Institutions, Interests, and Inter Firm Cooperation in Italy and Germany. New york: Cambridge University Press.

Fehr, Ernst, and Simon Gaechter. 2000. “Fairness and Retaliation: The Economics of Reciprocity.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 14: 159–181.

Fernandez, Roberto, and Roger Gould. 1994. “A Dilemma of State Power: Brokerage and Influence in the National Health-Policy Domain.”American Journal of Refe Sreoncicoelsogy 99: 1455–1491.

Ferrary, Michel, and Mark Granovetter. 2009. “The Role of Venture Capital Firms in Silicon Valley’s Complex Innovation Network.” Economy and Society 38: 326–359.

Festinger, Leon, Stanley Schachter, and Kurt Back. 1948. Social Pressures in InformalGroups. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Fine, Gary A., and Sheryl Kleinman. 1979. “Rethinking Subculture: An Interactionist Analysis.” American Journal of Sociology 85: 1–20.

Firth, Raymond. [1939] 1975. Primitive Polynesian Economy. London: Routledge.

Fligstein, Neil. 1990. The Transformation of Corporate Control.Cambridge, MA:Harvard University Press.

Fligstein, Neil, and Doug McAdam. 2012. A Theory of Fields.New york: oxford University Press.

Foddy, Margaret, and Toshio yamagishi. 2009. “Group-Based Trust.” pp. 17–41 in Whom Can We Trust?, edited by Karen Cook, Margaret Levi, and Russell Hardin. New york: The Russell Sage Foundation

Fourcade, Marion, and Kieran Healy. 2007. “Moral Views of Market Society.”Annual Review of Sociology 33: 285–311.

France, Anatole. 1894. The Red Lily.London: John Lane.

Frank, Robert. 1985. Choosing the Right Pond. New york: oxford University Press.

Freedman, Maurice. 1959. “The Handling of Money: A Note on the Background to the Economic Sophistication of overseas Chinese.” Man 59: 65.

Friedland, Roger, and Robert Alford. 1991. “Bringing Society Back In: Symbols,Practices, and Institutional Contradictions.” pp. 232–263 in The New Instittionalism in Organizational Analysis, edited by W. W. Powell and P. J. DiMaggio.Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Friedman, Milton. 1953. Essays in Positive Economics. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Frigant, Vincent, and Damien Talbot. 2005. “Technological Determinism and Modularity: Lessons from a Comparison between Aircraft and Auto Industries in Europe.” Industry and Innovation 12: 337–335.

Fukuyama, Francis. 1995. Trust. New york: Free Press.

Gambetta, Diego. 1988. “Can We Trust Trust?” pp. 213–237 in Trust: Making and Breaking Cooperative Relations, edited by D. Gambetta. New york: Basil Blackwell.

Gambetta, Diego, and Heather Hamill. 2005. Streetwise: How Taxi Drivers EstablishTheir Customers’ Trustworthiness.New york: The Russell Sage Foundation

Gartrell, David. 1982. “on the Visibility of Wage Referents.” Canadian Journal ofSociology 7: 117–143.

Geertz, Clifford. 1978. “The Bazaar Economy: Information and Search in Peasan Marketing.” American Economic Review 68: 28–32.

Gerlach, Michael. 1992. Alliance Capitalism: The Social Organization of Japanese Business. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.

Gladwell, Malcolm. 2014. “Sacred and Profane: How Not to Negotiate with Believers.” The New Yorke (March 31). Accessed at http://www.newyorker.

Glaeser, Edward, David Laibson, Jose Scheinkman, and Christine Soutter. 2000.

“Measuring Trust.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 115(August): 811–846.

Goffman, Erving. 1974.Frame Analysis: An Essay on the Organization of Experience.Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Gould, Roger V. 1989. “Power and Social Structure in Community Elites.” SocialForces 68: 531–552.

Gould, Roger, and Roberto Fernandez. 1989. “Structures of Mediation: A Formal Approach to Brokerage in Transaction Networks.” Sociological Methodology 19:89–126.

Gould, Steven Jay, and Richard Lewontin. 1979. “The Spandrels of San Marco and the Panglossian Paradigm: A Critique of the Adaptationist Programme.” Proceedings of the Royal Society of London B205: 581–598.

Grace, Randolph C., and Simon Kemp. 2005. “What Does the Ultimatum Game Mean in the Real World?” Behavioral and Brain Sciences 28: 824–825.

Graeber, David. 2001. Toward an Anthropological Theory of Value New york:Palgrave.

Granovetter, Mark. 1973. “The Strength of Weak Ties.”American Journal of Sociology 78: 1360–1380.

———. 1983. “The Strength of Weak Ties: A Network Theory Revisited.Sociological Theory1: 201–233.

———. 1985. “Economic Action and Social Structure: The Problem of Embeddeness.” American Journal of Sociology 91: 481–510.

———. 1990. “Theold and the New Economic Sociology: A History and an Agenda.” pp. 89–112 in Beyond the Marketplace: Rethinking Economy and Society, edited by R. Friedland and A. F. Robertson. New york: Aldine.

———. 1992. “The Nature of Economic Relations.” pp. 21–37 inUnderstanding Economic Process: Monographs in Economic Anthropology, No. 10, edited by Suttiortiz and Susan Lees. Lanham, MD: University Press of America.

———. 1995. Getting a Job: A Study of Contacts and Careers. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

———. 2002. “A Theoretical Agenda for Economic Sociology.” pp. 35–59 inTheNew Economic Sociology: Developments in an Emerging Field, edited by M. F.Guillen, R. Collins, P. England, and M. Meyer. New york: Russell Sage Foundation.

———. 2003. “Ignorance, Knowledge, and outcomes in a Small World.” Science 301(5634): 773–774.

———. 2005. “The Impact of Social Structure on Economicoutcomes.” Journal ofEconomic Perspectives 19: 33–50.

———. 2007. “The Social Construction of Corruption.” pp. 152–172 inOn Capitalism, edited by Victor Nee and Richard Swedberg. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.

———. 2009. “Comment on ‘Capitalist Entrepreneurship’ by T. Knudsen and R.Swedberg.” Capitalism and Society 4(2): 1–11.

Granovetter, Mark, and Patrick McGuire. 1998. “The Making of an Industry: Eletricity in the United States.” pp. 147–173 in The Laws of the Markets edited by Michel Callon. oxford: Blackwell.

Granovetter, Mark, and Richard Swedberg. 2011. The Sociology of Economic Life,3rd ed. Boulder, Co: Westview Press.

Grusky, David, and Jesper Sorensen. 1998. “Can Class Analysis Be Salvaged”?American Journal of Sociology 103(5): 1187–1234.

Guiso, Luigi, Paolo Sapienza, and Luigi Zingales. 2006. “Does Culture Affect Ecnomic outcomes?.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 2: 23–48.

———. 2008. “Trusting the Stock Market.” Journal of Finance 63: 2557–2600.

———. 2011. “Civic Capital as the Missing Link.” pp. 418–480 in Handbook of SocialEconomics, edited by Jess Benhabib, Alberto Bisin, and Matthew Jackson.North-Holland: Amsterdam.

Gulati, Ranjay, and Maxim Sytch. 2007. “Dependence Asymmetry and Joint Dependence in Interorganizational Relationships: Effects of Embeddedness on a Maufacturer’s Performance in Procurement Relationships.” Administrative ScienceQuarterly 52: 32–69.

Gulati, Ranjay, Maxim Sytch, and Adam Tatarynowicz. 2012. “The Rise and Fall of Small Worlds: Exploring the Dynamics of Social Structure.” Organization Science 23(2): 449–471.

Haidt, Jonathan, and Selin Kesebir. 2010. “Morality.” pp. 797–832 in Handbook ofSocial Psychology, 5th ed., edited by S. Fiske, D. Gilbert, and G. Lindzey.Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.

Hall, Peter. 2010. “Historical Institutionalism in Rationalist and Sociological Perspective.” pp. 204–224 in Explaining Institutional Change, edited by James Mahoney and Kathleen Thelen, Newyork: Cambridge University Press.

Hall, Peter, and David Soskice. 2001. Varieties of Capitalism: The Institutional Foudations of Comparative Advantage. oxford: oxford University Press.

Hamilton, Gary. 2000. “Reciprocity and Control: Theorganization of Chinese Family-owned Conglomerates” pp. 55–74 in Globalization of Chinese BusinessFirms, edited by H. W.-C. yeung and K. olds. New york: St. Martin’s.

Han, Shin-Kap. 2008. “Breadth and Depth of Unity among Chaebol Families in Korea.” Korean Journal of Sociology 42: 1–25.

Hanneman, Robert A., and Mark Riddle. 2005.Introduction to Social NetworkMethods. Riverside, CA: University of California, Riverside. (published in digital form at http://faculty.ucr.edu/~hanneman/)

Hansmann, Henry, and Reinier Kraakman. 2004. “The End of History for Corporate Law.” pp. 33–68 in Convergence and Persistence in Corporate Governance, editedby Jeffrey Gordon and Mark Ro. New york: Cambridge University Press.

Hardin, Russell. 2001. “Conceptions and Explanation of Trust.” pp. 3–39 in Trust inSociety, edited by K. Cook. New york: Russell Sage Foundation.

———. 2002. Trust and Trustworthiness. New york: Russell Sage Foundation.

Hedstrom, Peter. 2005. Dissecting the Social: On the Principles of Analytical Sociology.New york: Cambridge University Press.

Hedstrom, Peter, and Richard Swedberg, editors. 1998. Social Mechanisms: An Analytical Approach to Social Theor. New york: Cambridge University Press.

Hempel, Carl. 1965. Aspects of Scientific Explanation New york: Free Press.

Hendry, Joy. 1996. “The Chrysanthemum Continues to Flower: Ruth Benedict and Some Perils of Popular Anthropology.” pp. 106–121 in Popularizing Anthropology, edited by J. MacClancy and C. McDonaugh. London: Routledge.

Henrich, Joseph, Robert Boyd, Samuel Bowles, Colin Camerer, Ernst Fehr, and Herbert Gintis. 2004. Foundations of Human Sociality: Economic Experiments and Ethnographic Evidence from Fifteen Small-Scale Societies oxford: oxford University Press.

Henrich, Joseph, Robert Boyd, Samuel Bowles, Colin Camerer, Ernst Fehr, Herbert Gintis, Richard McElreath, Michael Alvard, Abigail Barr, Jean Ensminger,Natalie Smith Henrich, Kim Hill, Francisco Gil-White, Michael Gurven, Frank W. Marlowe, John Q. Patton, and David Tracer. 2005. “‘Economic Man’ in Cross-Cultural Perspective: Behavioral Experiments in 15 Small-Scale Societies.” Behavioral and Brain Sciences 28: 795–855.

Herrigel, Gary. 1996. Industrial Constructions: The Sources of German Industrial Power. New york: Cambridge University Press.

Power. New york: Cambridge University Press.

———. 2005. “Institutionalists at the Limits of Institutionalism: A Constructivist Critique of Two Edited Volumes from Wolfgang Streeck and Kozo yamamura.”Socio-Economic Review 3: 559–567.

———. 2010. Manufacturing Possibilities: Creative Action and Industrial Recomposition in the United States, Germany, and Japan. New york: oxford University Press.

Hirschman, Albert. 1977. The Passions and the Interests Princeton: Princeton University Press.

———. 1982. “Rival Interpretations of Market Society: Civilizing, Destructive, or Feeble.” Journal of Economic Literature 20: 1463–1484.

Hirshleifer, Jack. 1985. “The Expanding Domain of Economics.” The American Eco-nomic Review 75(6): 53–68.

Homans, George C. 1950. The Human Group. New york: Harcourt, Brace and Company.

———. 1971. Social Behavior: The Elementary Forms. New york: Harcourt, Brace Jovanovich.

Hucker, Charles. 1975. China’s Imperial Past: An Introduction to Chinese History and Culture. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.

Jackson, Matthew. 2010. Social and Economic Networks. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Jacobides, Michael, and John Paul MacDuffie. 2013. “How to Drive Value your Way.” Harvard Business Review 91: 92–100.

Jacobides, Michael, John Paul MacDuffie, and C. Jennifer Tae. 2016. “Agency. Struc-ture, and the Dominance of oEMs: Change and Stability in the Automotive Sector. Strategic Management Journal 37: 1942–1967.

Kaplan, Sarah. 2008. “Framing Contests: Strategy Making under Uncertainty.” Organization Science September–october: 729–752.

Katz, Elihu, and Paul Lazarsfeld. 1955. Personal Influence: The Part Played by People in the Flow of Mass Communications. New york: Free Press.

Ciurlotuurxe.. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.

Kaplan, Sarah. 2008. “Framing Contests: Strategy Making under Uncertainty.”Organization Science September–october: 729–752.

Katz, Elihu, and Paul Lazarsfeld. 1955. Personal Influence: The Part Played by Peopl in the Flow of Mass Communications. New york: Free Press.

Keister, Lisa. 2000. Chinese Business Groups: The Structure and Impact of Interfir Relations during Economic Development. New york: oxford University Press.

Kennedy, David M. 1975. “overview: The Progressive Era.”The Historia 37(3):453–468.

Kim, Eun Mee. 1997. Big Business, Strong State: Collusion and Conflict in South

Korean Development 1960–1990. Albany, Ny: SUNy Press.

Kiong, Tong Chee. 1991. “Centripetal Authority, Differentiated Networks: Th Social organization of Chinese Firms in Singapore.” In Business Networks andEconomic Development in East and Southeast Asia, edited by G. Hamilton.Hong Kong: Centre of Asian Studies, University of Hong Kong.

Kirzner, Israel. 1973. Competition and Entrepreneurship. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Kontopoulos, Kyriakos. 1993. The Logics of Social Structur New york: Cambridge University Press.

Krippner, Greta, Mark Granovetter, Fred Block, Nicole Biggart, Tom Beamish, youtien Tsing, Gillian Hart, Giovanni Arrighi, Margie Mendell, John Hall, Michael Burawoy, Steve Vogel, and Sean o’Riain. 2004. “Polanyi Symposium: A Conversation on Embeddedness.” Socio-Economic Review 2: 109–135.

Krueger, Anne. 1974. “The Political Economy of the Rent-Seeking Society.”American Economic Review 64(3): 291–303.

Kurlansky, Mark. 2002. Salt: A World History. New york: Walker.

Lamoreaux, Naomi. 1994. Insider Lending: Banks, Personal Connections, and Economic Development in Industrial New England. New york: Cambridge University Press.

LaPorta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny. 1997.

Lawler, Edward, and Jeongkoo yoon. 1996. “Commitment in Exchange Relations: A Test of a Theory of Relational Cohesion.”American Sociological Review 61(1):89–108.

Lazerson, Mark, and Gianni Lorenzoni. 1999. “The Firms That Feed Industrial Dtricts: A Return to the Italian Source.” Industrial and Corporate Change 8:235–266.

Leibenstein, Harvey. 1976. Beyond Economic Man: A New Foundation for Microeconomics. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Leifer, Eric. 1991. Actors as Observers: A Theory of Skill in Social Relationships London: Routledge.

Lepore, Jill. 2014. “The Disruption Machine: What the Gospel of Innovation Gets Wrong.” June 23 (http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2014/06/23/the-disruption-machine).

Levy, Marion J., Jr. 1954. “Contrasting Factors in the Modernization of China and Japan.” Economic Development and Cultural Change 2: 161–197.

Lewis, Michael. 2010. The Big Short: Inside the Doomsday Machine New york:W. W. Norton.

Lie, John. 2001. Multiethnic Japan. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Light, Ivan. 1972. Ethnic Enterprise in America. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.

Lim, Linda y. C., and L. A. Peter Gosling. 1983. The Chinese in Southeast Asia.Volume 1: Ethnicity and Economic Activity. Singapore: Maruzen.

Lincoln, James, and Michael Gerlach. 2004. Japan’s Network Economy: Structure,Persistence, and Change. New york: Cambridge University Press.

Lindquist, W. B., and I. D. Chase. 2009. “Data-Based Analysis of Winner-Loser Models of Hierarchy Formation in Animals. Bulletin of Mathematical Biology 71: 556–584.

Locke, Richard. 1995. Remaking the Italian Economy. Ithaca, Ny: Cornell University Press.

———. 2001. “Building Trust.” Paper presented at annual meeting of the AmericanPolitical Science Association.

———. 2013. The Promise and Limits of Private Power: Promoting Labor Standards in a Global Economy. New york: Cambridge University Press.

Lounsbury, Michael. 2007. “A Tale of Two Cities: Competing Logics and Practice Variation in the Professionalization of Mutual Funds.” Academy of ManagementJournal 50: 289–307.

Lukes, Steven. 1974. Power: A Radical View. London: Macmillan.

Luo, Jar-Der. 2011. “Guanxi Revisited: An Exploratory Study of Familiar Ties in a Chinese Workplace.” Management and Organization Review 7(2): 329–351.

Lynch, Gerard. 1997. “The Role of Criminal Law in Policing Corporate Misco Macaulay, Stewart. 1963. “Non-Contractual Relations in Business: A Preliminary Study.” American Sociological Review 28: 55–69.

MacDuffie, John Paul. 2013. “Modularity-as-Property, Modularization-as-Process and ‘Modularity’-as-Frame: Lessons from Product Architecture Initiatives in the Global Automotive Industry.” Global Strategy Journal 3: 8–40.

MacDuffie, John Paul, and Susan Helper. 2006. “Collaboration in Supply Chains With and Without Trust.” pp. 417–466 in The Firm as a Collaborative Commnity: Reconstructing Trust in the Knowledge Economy, edited by Charles Heckscher and Paul Adler. New york: oxford University Press.

Mahoney, James, and Katherine Thelen, editors. 2009.Explaining InstitutionalChange: Ambiguity, Agency, and Power. New york: Cambridge University Press.

Malinowski, Bronislaw. 2014 [1922]. Argonauts of the Western Pacifi. New york:Routledge.

———. 1944. A Scientific Theory of Culture and Other Essay Chapel Hill, NC: University of North Carolina Press.

Mann, Michael. 1986. The Sources of Social Power: A History of Power from the Beginning to a.d. 1760. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.

———. 1993. The Sources of Social Power: The Rise of Classes and Nation-States 1760–1914. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.

March, James G., and Herbert Simon. 1993. Organizations. 2nd ed. New york:Wiley.

Marchetti, P., and M. Ventoruzzo. 2001. “Corporate Law.” pp. 2803–2810 in International Encyclopedia of the Social and Behavioral Sciences, edited by N. Smelserand P. Baltes. London: Elsevier.

McAdams, Richard. 1997. “Theorigin, Development, and Regulation of Norms.”Michigan Law Review 96: 338–433.

McCloskey, Donald. 1983. “The Rhetoric of Economics.”Journal of Economic Literature 21: 481–517.

McDonald, Forrest. 1962. Insull. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

McEvily, William, and Marco Tortoriello. 2011. “Measuring Trust in organizational Research: Review and Recommendations.” Journal of Trust Research 1: 23–63.

McGuire, Patrick, and Mark Granovetter. 1998. “Business and Bias in Public Policy Formation: The National Civic Federation and Social Construction of Electric Utility Regulation, 1905–1907.” Paper presented at the 1998 meeting of the American Sociological Association.

Merton, Robert K. 1947. Social Theory and Social Structure Glencoe, IL: Free Press of Glencoe.

———. 1957. Social Theory and Social Structure Rev. ed. Glencoe, IL: Free Press of Glencoe.

Meyer, John, and Brian Rowan. 1977. “Institutionalized organizations: Formal Structure as Myth and Ceremony.” American Journal of Sociology 83: 340–363.

Meyer, John, John Boli, George Thomas, and Francisco Ramirez. 1997. “World 228Society and the Nation-State.” American Journal of Sociology 103: 144–R1ef8e1r.ences Meyer, Marshall, and Lynne Zucker. 1989. Permanently Failing Organizations. Newbury Park, CA: Sage Publications.

Mills, C. Wright. [1956] 2000. The Power Elite New york: oxford University Press.

Mintz, Beth, and Michael Schwartz. 1985. The Power Structure of American Busness. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.

Mizruchi, Mark. 2010. “The American Corporate Elite and the Historical Roots of the Financial Crisis of 2008,” in Markets on Trial: The Economic Sociology of the U.S. Financial Crisis, edited by Michael Lounsbury and Paul Hirsch. Research inthe Sociology of Organizations 30: 103–139.

———. 2013. The Fracturing of the American Corporate Elite Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Mizruchi, Mark, and Blyden Potts. 1998. “Centrality and Power Revisited: Actor Success in Group Decision Making.” Social Networks 20: 353–387.

Mokyr, Joel. 2005. “Long-Term Economic Growth and the History of Technology.”pp. 1113–1180 in Handbook of Economic Growth, Vol. 1, Part B, edited by Philippe Aghion and Steven Durlauf. Amsterdam: Elsevier.

Molm, Linda. 2001. “Theories of Social Exchange and Exchange Networks.”pp. 260–272 in Handbook of Social Theory,edited by George Ritzer and Barry Smart. London: Sage Publications.

———. 2003. “Theoretical Comparisons of Forms of Exchange.”Sociological Theor 21(1: January): 1–17.

Mnookin, Robert, and Lewis Kornhauser. 1979. “Bargaining in the Shadow of the Law: The Case of Divorce.”Yale Law Journal 88(5): 950–997.

Nagel, Ernest. 1961. The Structure of Science New york: McGraw Hill.

Nelson, Joel. 1966. “Clique Contacts and Family orientations.” American Sociological Review 31: 663–672.

Nelson, Richard, and Sidney Winter. 1982. An Evolutionary Theory of EconomicChange. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Nishiguchi, Toshihiro, and Alexandre Beaudet. 1998. “The Toyota Group and the Aisin Fire.” Sloan Management Review 40: 49–59.

obstfeld, David. 2005. “Social Networks, the Tertius Iungens orientation, and Involvement in Innovation.” Administrative Science Quarterly 50: 100–130.

obstfeld, David, Stephen Borgatti, and Jason Davis. 2014. “Brokerage as a Process:Decoupling Third-Party Action from Social Network Structure.”Research in theSociology of Organizations 40: 135–159.

okun, Arthur. 1980. Prices and Quantities. Washington D.C: Brookings Institution.

orwell, George. 1945. Animal Farm. London: Secker and Warburg.

ostrom, Elinor. 2003. “Toward a Behavioral Theory Linking Trust, Reciprocity, and Reputation.” pp. 19–79 in Trust and Reciprocity: Interdisciplinary Lessons from Experimental Research, edited by E. ostrom and J. Walker. New york: Russell Sage Foundation.

ouchi, William. 1981. Theory Z Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.

Padgett, John, and Christopher Ansell. 1993. “Robust Action and the Rise of the Medici.” American Journal of Sociology 98: 1259–1319.

Padgett John, and Paul MacLean. 2006. “organizational Invention and Elite Transformation: The Birth of Partnership Systems in Renaissance Florence.”American Journal of Sociology 111: 1463–1568

Padgett, John, and Walter Powell. 2012. The Emergence of Organizations and Makets. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Parsons, Talcott. 1937. The Structure of Social Action: A Study in Social Theory wit Special Reference to a Group of Recent European Writers. Glencoe, IL: Free Pressof Glencoe.

———. 1959. “General Theory in Sociology.” InSociology Today: Problems andProspects, edited by R. K. Merton, L. Broom, and L. S. Cottrell Jr. New york:Basic Books.

———. 1961. “An outline of the Social System.” pp. 30–79 in Theories of Society,edited by Talcott Parsons, Edward Shils, Kaspar Naegele, and Jesse Pitts.Glencoe, IL: Free Press of Glencoe.

———. 1963. “on the Concept of Political Power 107(3: June 19): 232–262.” Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society 107: 232–262.

Parsons, Talcott, and Neil J. Smelser. 1956. Economy and Society: A Study in theIntegration of Social and Economic Theory Glencoe, IL: Free Press of Glencoe.

Patterson, orlando. 1982. Slavery and Social Death: A Comparative Study. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Pempel, T. J. 2005. “Alternative Capitalisms Confront New Pressures to Conform.”Socio-Economic Review 3: 569–575.

Penrose, Edith. [1959] 1995. The Theory of the Growth of the Fir oxford: oxford University Press.

Perrow, Charles. 1986. Complex Organizations: A Critical Essay. 3rd edition. Newyork: Random House.

Pettit, P. 2001. “Consequentialism Including Utilitarianism.” pp. 2613–2618 in International Encyclopedia of the Social and Behavioral Sciences, edited by N.Smelser and P. Baltes. New york: Elsevier.

Pfeffer, Jeffrey. 1981Power in Organizations. Boston: Pitman.

Pfeffer, Jeffrey, and Gerald Salancik. 1978The External Control of Organizations: AResource Dependence Perspective. New york: Harper and Row.

Piore, Michael, and Charles Sabel. 1984. The Second Industrial Divide: Possibilities for Prosperity. New york: Basic Books.

Popkin, Samuel. 1979. The Rational Peasant: The Political Economy of Rural Societ in Vietnam. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.

Portes, Alejandro, and Julia Sensenbrenner. 1993. “Embeddedness and Immigration: Notes on the Social Determinants of Economic Action.” American Journal Posner, Eric. 1996. “Law, Economics, and Inefficient NormsUniversity of Pennsylvania Law Review 144: 1697–1744.

———. 2000. Law and Social Norms. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Posner, Richard. 1998. “Social Norms, Social Meaning, and Economic Analysis of Law: A Comment.” Journal of Legal Studies 37(2: Pt. 2): 553–565.

Prahalad, C. K., and Gary Hamel. 1990. “The Core Competence of a Corporation.”Harvard Business Review 68: 79–91.

Putnam, Robert. 1993. Making Democracy Work: Civic Traditions in Modern Italy.Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Rao, Hayagreeva, Philippe Monin, and Rodolphe Durand. 2003. “Institutional Change in Toque Ville: Nouvelle Cuisine as an Identity Movement in French Gastronomy.” American Journal of Sociology 108: 795–843.

Reagans, Ray, and Ezra Zuckerman. 2008. “Why Knowledge Does Not Equal Power:The Network Redundancy Tradeoff.Industrial and Corporate Change 17:903–944.

Reddy, William. 1984. The Rise of Market Culture: The Textile Trade and Frenc Society, 1750–1900. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.

Ricardo, David. 1821. On the Principles of Political Economy and Taxation. 3rd ed.London: John Murray, Albemarle-Street.

Robbins, Lionel. 1932. An Essay on the Nature and Significance of Economic Science London: Macmillan.

Roe, Mark. 1994. Strong Managers, Weak Owners: The Political Roots of American Corporate Finance. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Roosevelt, Franklin D. 1932. “Campaign Address on Progressive Government at the Commonwealth Club in San Francisco, California.” Text at http://www.heritage.org/initiatives/first-principles/primary-sources/fdrs-commonwealth-club-address

Rosenberg, Nathan. 2000. Schumpeter and the Endogeneity of Technology: Some American Perspectives. London: Routledge.

Rostow, W. W. 1960. The Stages of Economic Growth: A Non-Communist Manifesto Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.

Rousseau, Denise, Sim Sitkin, Ronald Burt, and Colin Camerer. 1998. “Not So Different after All: A Cross-Discipline View of Trust.”Academy of ManagementReview 23: 393–404.

Sabel, Charles. 1982. Work and Politics: The Division of Labor in Industry New york:Cambridge University Press.

———. 1993. “Studied Trust: Building New Forms of Cooperation in a Volatile Economy.” Human Relations 46: 1133–1171.

Sahlins, Marshall. 1972. Stone Age Economics. Hawthorne, Ny: Aldine.

Samuelson, Paul. 1947. Foundations of Economic Analysis. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Saxenian, Annalee. 1994. Regional Advantage: Culture and Competition in Silicon Refer Veanllceeys and Route 128. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.231 Schotter, Andrew. 1981. The Economic Theor y of Social Institution New york:Cambridge University Press.

Schumpeter, Joseph. 1911. The Theory of Economic DevelopmentLeipzig: Duncker and Humblot.

Scott, James C. 1976. The Moral Economy of the Peasant: Rebellion and Subsistence in Southeast Asia. New Haven, CT: yale University Press.

Scott, John. 2010. What Is Social Network Analysis? London: Bloomsbury.

———. 2013. Social Network Analysis. 3rd ed. Newbury Park, CA: Sage Publications.

Scott, John, and Peter Carrington. 2011. Sage Handbook of Social Network Analysis.Newbury Park, CA: Sage Publications.

Scott, W. Richard. 2014. Institutions and Organizations: Ideas, Interests, and Identities. 4th ed. Los Angeles, CA: Sage Publications.

Sen, Amartya. 1977. “Rational Fools: A Critique of the Behavioral Foundations of Economic Theory.”Philosophy and Public Affair 6: 317–344.

Shapiro, Susan. 1984. Wayward Capitalists: Target of the Securities and Exchange Commission. New Haven, CT: yale University Press.

Sheingate, Adam. 2010. “Rethinking Rules: Creativity and Constraint in the U.S.House of Representatives.” pp. 168–203 in Explaining Institutional Change:Ambiguity, Agency, and Power, edited by James Mahoney and Kathleen Thelen.New york: Cambridge University Press.

Shenon, Philip. 1984. “Margolies Is Found Guilty of Murdering Two Women.” NewYork Times (June 1).

Silver, Allan. 1989. “Friendship and Trust as Moral Ideals: An Historical Approach.”European Journal of Sociology 30: 274–297.

———. 1990. “Friendship in Commercial Society: Eighteenth-Century Social Theory and Modern Sociology.”American Journal of Sociology 95:1474–1504.

Simmel, Georg. [1908] 1950. The Sociology of Georg Simme, translated by K. Wolff.New york: The Free Press

Simon, Herbert A. 1997. Administrative Behavior. 4th ed. New york: The Free Press Smith, Adam. [1776] 1976. An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations. oxford: oxford University Press.

Snow, David, D. Rochford Jr., S. Worden, and R. Benford. 1986. “Frame Alignment Processes, Micromobilization and Social Movement Participation.” AmericanSociological Review 51(August): 464–481.

Solomon, Richard L. 1964. “Punishment.” American Psychologist 19: 237–253.

Sorge, Arndt. 2005. The Global and the Local: Understanding the Dialectics of Busness Systems. New york: oxford University Press.

Spence, A. Michael. 1974. Market Signaling: Informational Transfer in Hiring and Related Screening Processes. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Stark, David. 1986. “Rethinking Internal Labor Markets: New Insights from a Comparative Perspective.” American Sociological Review 51: 492–504.References———. 2009. The Sense of Dissonance: Accounts of Worth in Economic Life. Princeton,NJ: Princeton University Press.

Sternberg, Robert J., and Karin Sternberg. 2017. Cognitive Psychology. 7th ed.Boston: Cengage Learning.

Stigler, George. 1946. The Theory of Pric New york: Macmillan.

Stinchcombe, Arthur. 1968. Constructing Social Theories New york: Harcourt,Brace and World.

Stovel, Katherine, Benjamin Golub, and Eva Meyersson Milgrom. 2011. “Stabilizing Brokerage.” PNAS 108: 21326–21332.

Stovel, Katherine, and Lynette Shaw. 2012. “Brokerage.” Annual Review of Sociology 38: 139–158.

Strauss, George. 1955. “Group Dynamics and Intergroup Relations.” pp. 90-96 in Money and Motivation: An Analysis of Incentives in Industry, edited by William F. Whyte. New york: Harper and Row.

Streeck, W. 2005. “Rejoinder: on Terminology, Functionalism, (Historical) Institutionalism, and Liberalization.” Socio-Economic Review 3: 577–587.

———. 2011. “E Pluribus Unum? Varieties and Commonalities of Capitalism.”pp. 419–455 in The Sociology of Economic Life 3rd ed., edited by M. Granovetter and R. Swedberg. Boulder, Co: Westview Press.

Streeck, W., and K. yamamura. 2001. The Origins of Non-Liberal Capitalism: Gemany and Japan in Comparison. Ithaca, Ny: Cornell University Press.

Sturgeon, Timothy J. 2002. “Modular Production Networks: A New American Model of Industrial organization.” Industrial and Corporate Change 11:451–496.

Sunstein, Cass. 1996. “Social Norms and Social Roles” Columbia Law Review 96:903–968.

Swedberg, Richard. 2003. Principles of Economic Sociology. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Swidler, Ann. 1986. “Culture in Action: Symbols and Strategies.” American Sociological Review 51: 273–286.

Taira, Koji. 1970. Economic Development and the Labor Market in Japan. New york:Columbia University Press.

Tarbell, Ida M. 1904. The History of the Standard Oil Company.New york: McClure,Phillips and Company.

Thompson, E. P. 1971. “The Moral Economy of the English Crowd in the Eiteenth Century.” Past and Present 50: 76–136.

Thornton, Patricia, and Williamocasio. 1999. “Institutional Logics and the Historical Contingency of Power in organizations: Executive Succession in the Higher Educational Publishing Industry, 1958–1990.” American Journal of Sociology 105: 801–843.

Thornton Patricia, Williamocasio, and Michael Lounsbury. 2012. The InstitutionalLogics Perspective: A New Approach to Culture, Structure, and Process. oxford: Tocqueville, Alexis de. [1856] 1955. The Old Regime and the French Revolution New york: Doubleday.

Tolbert, Pamela, and Lynne Zucker. 1983. “Institutional Sources of Change in the Formal Structure of organizations: The Diffusion of Civil Service Reform 1880–1935.” Administrative Science Quarterly 28: 22–39.

Tversky, Amos, and Daniel Kahneman. 1981. “The Framing of Decisions and the Psychology of Choice.” Science 211(January 30): 453–458.

Tyler, Tom. 2001. “Why Do People Rely on others? Social Identity and the Social Aspects of Trust.” pp. 285–306 in Trust in Society, edited by K. Cook. New york:Russell Sage Foundation.

———. 2006. Why People Obey the Law. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Useem, Michael. 1984. The Inner Circle: Large Corporations and the Rise of Business Political Activity in the U.S. and the U.K. New york: oxford University Press.

Vaisey, Steven. 2009. “Motivation and Justification: A Dual-Process Model of Cuture in Action.” American Journal of Sociology 114(6 May): 1675–1715.

Veblen, Thorstein. 1899.The Theory of the Leisure Clas New york: Macmillan.

Walker, James, and Elinor ostrom. 2003. “Conclusion.” pp.381–387 in Trust andReciprocity, edited by Elinor ostrom and James Walker. New york: The Russell Sage Foundation.

Wasserman, Stanley, and Katherine Faust. 1994. Social Network Analysis: Methodsand Applications. New york: Cambridge University Press.

Watts, Duncan, and Steven Strogatz. 1998. “Collective Dynamics of ‘Small-World’Networks.” Nature 393: 440–442.

Weber, Max. [1921] 1968. Economy and Society, translated by Guenther Roth and Claus Wittich. New york: Bedminster Press.

Wellman, Barry. 1979. “The Community Question: The Intimate Networks of Eas yorkers.” American Journal of Sociology 84: 1201–1231.

Whitford, Joshua. 2002. “Pragmatism and the Untenable Duality of Means and Ends.” Theory and Societ 31: 325–363.

———. 2005. The New Old Economy: Networks, Institutions, and the Organizational Transformation of American Manufacturing. New york: oxford University Press.

———. 2012. “Waltzing, Relational Work, and the Construction (or Not) of Collaboration in Manufacturing Industries.” Politics and Society 40: 249–272.

Whitford, Joshua, and Francesco Zirpoli. 2014. “Pragmatism, Practice, and the Boundaries of organization.” Organization Science 25(6): 1823–1839.

———. 2016. “The Network Firm as a Political Coalition.”Organization Studies 37: 1227–1248

Wiebe, Robert. 1967. The Search for Order: 1877–1920.New york: Hill and Wang.

Williamson, oliver. 1975. Markets and Hierarchies. New york: Free Press.

———. 1991. “Comparative Economic organization: The Analysis of Discrete Structural Alternatives.” Administrative Science Quarterly 36: 269–296.

——. 1993. “Calculativeness, Trust, and Economic organization.” Journ Rale foefr eLnacewsand Economics 36: 453–486.

Wilson, Edward o. 1975. Sociobiology. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Woodward, Joan. 1965. Industrial Organization: Theory and Practice New york:oxford University Press.

Wright, Gavin. 1999. “Can a Nation Learn? American Technology as a Network Phenomenon.” pp. 295–326 in Learning by Doing in Markets, Firms, and Countries. edited by N. Lamoreaux, D. Raff, and P. Temin. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Wrong, Dennis. 1961. “The over socialized Conception of Man in Modern Sociology.” American Sociological Review 26: 183–196.

———. 1995. Power: Its Forms, Bases and Uses. New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction Publishers.

yamamura, K., and W. Streeck. 2003. The End of Diversity?: Prospects for German and Japanese Capitalism. Ithaca, Ny: Cornell University Press.

Zeitlin, Maurice, and Richard Ratcliff. 1988.Landlords and Capitalists: The Domnant Class of Chile. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Zelizer, Viviana. 2005. The Purchase of Intimacy.Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Zucker, Lynne. 1986. “Production of Trust: Institutional Sources of Economic Structure, 1840–1920.” Research in Organizational Behavior 8: 53–111.




