Nate Silver.(2012).2018173The-Signal-and-the-Noise.Penguin Group => 0101



## 1101IF YOU CAN'T BEAT 'EM . . .

In 2009, a year after a financial crisis had wrecked the global economy, American investors traded $8 million in stocks every second that the New York Stock Exchange was open for business. Over the course of the typical trading day, the volume grew to $185 billion, roughly as much as the economies of Nigeria, the Philippines or Ireland produce in an entire year. Over the course of the whole of 2009, more than $46 trillion1 in stocks were traded: four times more than the revenues of all the companies in the Fortune 500 put together.2

This furious velocity of trading is something fairly new. In the 1950s, the average share of common stock in an American company was held for about six years before being traded—consistent with the idea that stocks are a long-term investment. By the 2000s, the velocity of trading had increased roughly twelvefold. Instead of being held for six years, the same share of stock was traded after just six months.3 The trend shows few signs of abating: stock market volumes have been doubling once every four or five years. With the advent of high-frequency trading, some stocks are now literally bought and sold in a New York microsecond.4

FIGURE 11-1: AVERAGE TIME U.S. COMMON STOCK WAS HELD

Economics 101 teaches that trading is rational only when it makes both parties better off. A baseball team with two good shortstops but no pitching trades one of them to a team with plenty of good arms but a shortstop who's batting .190. Or an investor who is getting ready to retire cashes out her stocks and trades them to another investor who is just getting his feet wet in the market.

But very little of the trading that occurs on Wall Street today conforms to this view. Most of it reflects true differences of opinion—contrasting predictions—about the future returns of a stock.* Never before in human history have so many predictions been made so quickly and for such high stakes.

Why so much trading occurs is one of the greatest mysteries in finance.5 More and more people seem to think they can outpredict the collective wisdom of the market. Are these traders being rational? And if not, can we expect the market to settle on a rational price?

A Trip to Bayesland

If you follow the guidance provided by Bayes's theorem, as this book recommends, then you'll think about the future in terms of a series of probabilistic beliefs or forecasts. What are the chances that Barack Obama will be reelected? That Lindsay Lohan will be arrested again? That we will discover evidence of life on other another planet? That Rafael Nadal will win at Wimbledon? Some Bayesians assert6 that the most sensible way to think about these probabilities is in terms of the betting line we would set. If you take the idea to its logical extreme, then in Bayesland we all walk around with giant sandwich boards advertising our odds on each of these bets:

FIGURE 11-2: BAYESIAN SANDWICH BOARD

TODAY'S PRICES

OBAMA WINS REELECTION 55%

LOHAN GETS ARRESTED 99%

STOCK MARKET CRASHES 10%

LIFE ON MARS 2%

NADAL WINS WIMBLEDON 30%

In Bayesland, when two people pass each other by and find that they have different forecasts, they are obliged to do one of two things. The first option is to come to a consensus and revise their forecasts to match. If my sandwich board says that Nadal has a 30 percent chance to win Wimbledon, and yours says that he has a 50 percent chance instead, then perhaps we both revise our estimates to 40 percent. But we don't necessarily have to meet in the middle; if you're more up on Lindsay Lohan gossip than I am, perhaps I capitulate to you and concede that your Lindsay Lohan forecast is better, thereby adopting it as my own belief. Either way, we walk away from the meeting with the same number in mind—a revised and, we hope, more accurate forecast about the probability of some real-world event.

But sometimes we won't agree. The law of the land says that we must then settle our differences by placing a bet on our forecasts. In Bayesland, you must make one of these two choices: come to a consensus or bet.* Otherwise, to a Bayesian, you are not really being rational. If after we have our little chat, you still think your forecast is better than mine, you should be happy to bet on it, since you stand to make money. If you don't, you should have taken my forecast and adopted it as your own.

Of course, this whole process would be incredibly inefficient. We'd have to maintain forecasts on thousands and thousands of events and keep a ledger of the hundreds of bets that we had outstanding at any given time. In the real world, this is the function that markets play. They allow us to make transactions at one fixed price, at a consensus price, rather than having to barter or bet on everything.7

The Bayesian Invisible Hand

In fact, free-market capitalism and Bayes' theorem come out of something of the same intellectual tradition. Adam Smith and Thomas Bayes were contemporaries, and both were educated in Scotland and were heavily influenced by the philosopher David Hume. Smith's "invisible hand" might be thought of as a Bayesian process, in which prices are gradually updated in response to changes in supply and demand, eventually reaching some equilibrium. Or, Bayesian reasoning might be thought of as an "invisible hand" wherein we gradually update and improve our beliefs as we debate our ideas, sometimes placing bets on them when we can't agree. Both are consensus-seeking processes that take advantage of the wisdom of crowds.

It might follow, then, that markets are an especially good way to make predictions. That's really what the stock market is: a series of predictions about the future earnings and dividends of a company.8 My view is that this notion is mostly right most of the time. I advocate the use of betting markets for forecasting economic variables like GDP, for instance. One might expect these markets to improve predictions for the simple reason that they force us to put our money where our mouth is, and create an incentive for our forecasts to be accurate.

Another viewpoint, the efficient-market hypothesis, makes this point much more forcefully: it holds that it is impossible under certain conditions to outpredict markets. This view, which was the orthodoxy in economics departments for several decades, has become unpopular given the recent bubbles and busts in the market, some of which seemed predictable after the fact. But, the theory is more robust than you might think.

And yet, a central premise of this book is that we must accept the fallibility of our judgment if we want to come to more accurate predictions. To the extent that markets are reflections of our collective judgment, they are fallible too. In fact, a market that makes perfect predictions is a logical impossibility.

Justin Wolfers, Prediction Markets Cop

If there really were a Bayesland, then Justin Wolfers, a fast-talking, ponytailed polymath who is among America's best young economists, would be its chief of police, writing a ticket anytime he observed someone refusing to bet on their forecasts. Wolfers challenged me to a dinner bet after I wrote on my blog that I thought Rick Santorum would win the Iowa caucus, bucking the prediction market Intrade (as well as my own predictive model), which still showed Mitt Romney ahead. In that case, I was willing to commit to the bet, which turned out well for me after Santorum won by literally just a few dozen votes after a weeks-long recount.* But there have been other times when I have been less willing to accept one of Wolfers' challenges. Presuming you are a betting man as I am, what good is a prediction if you aren't willing to put money on it?

Wolfers is from Australia, where he supported himself in college by running numbers for a bookie in Sydney.9 He now lives in Philadelphia, where he teaches at the Wharton School and writes for the Freakonomics blog. I visited Wolfers at his home, where he was an outstanding host, having ordered a full complement of hoagie sandwiches from Sarcone's to welcome me, my research assistant Arikia Millikan, and one of his most talented students, David Rothschild. But he was buttering me up for a roast.

Wolfers and Rothschild had been studying the behavior of prediction markets like Intrade, a sort of real-life version of Bayesland in which traders buy and sell shares of stock that represent real-world news predictions—everything from who will win the Academy Award for Best Picture to the chance of an Israeli air strike on Iran. Political events are especially popular subjects for betting. One stock, for instance, might represent the possibility that Hillary Clinton would win the Democratic nomination in 2008. The stock pays a dividend of $100 if the proposition turns out to be true (Clinton wins the nomination) but nothing otherwise. However, the traders can exchange their shares as much as they want until the outcome is determined. The market price for a share thus represents a consensus prediction about an outcome's likelihood. (At one market,10 shares in Clinton stock crashed to $18 after she lost the Iowa caucuses, rebounded to $66 when she won the New Hampshire primary, and slowly drifted back down toward $0 as Obama outlasted her in the campaign.) Markets like these have a long tradition in politics, dating back to at least the 1892 presidential election, when stocks in Grover Cleveland and Benjamin Harrison were traded just steps away from the American Stock Exchange.11

"You should tell Nate about the comparison paper," Wolfers said to Rothschild a few minutes into lunch, a mischievous grin on his face.

"I did a paper for an academic journal that looked at de-biased Internet-based polling, comparing it to prediction markets in 2008, showing they were comparable," Rothschild volunteered.

"That's way too polite," Wolfers interrupted. "It was Intrade versus Nate."

"And Intrade won," Rothschild said.

Rothschild's paper, which was published in Public Opinion Quarterly,12 compared the forecasts I made at FiveThirtyEight over the course of the 2008 election cycle with the predictions at Intrade. It concluded that, although FiveThirtyEight's forecasts had done fairly well, Intrade's were better.

The Benefits (and Limitations) of Group Forecasts

I have some quarrels with the paper's methodology. Intrade's forecasts beat FiveThirtyEight's only after Wolfers and Rothschild made certain adjustments to them after the fact; otherwise FiveThirtyEight won.13 Perhaps more important, a new forecast at FiveThrityEight fairly often moved the Intrade price in the same direction, suggesting that the bettors there were piggybacking off it to some extent.

Nevertheless, there is strong empirical and theoretical evidence that there is a benefit in aggregating different forecasts. Across a number of disciplines, from macroeconomic forecasting to political polling, simply taking an average of everyone's forecast rather than relying on just one has been found to reduce forecast error,14 often by about 15 or 20 percent.

But before you start averaging everything together, you should understand three things. First, while the aggregate forecast will essentially always be better than the typical individual's forecast, that doesn't necessarily mean it will be good. For instance, aggregate macroeconomic forecasts are much too crude to predict recessions more than a few months in advance. They are somewhat better than individual economists' forecasts, however.

Second, the most robust evidence indicates that this wisdom-of-crowds principle holds when forecasts are made independently before being averaged together. In a true betting market (including the stock market), people can and do react to one another's behavior. Under these conditions, where the crowd begins to behave more dynamically, group behavior becomes more complex.

Third, although the aggregate forecast is better than the typical individual's forecast, it does not necessarily hold that it is better than the best individual's forecast. Perhaps there is some polling firm, for instance, whose surveys are so accurate that it is better to use their polls and their polls alone rather than dilute them with numbers from their less-accurate peers.

When this property has been studied over the long run, however, the aggregate forecast has often beaten even the very best individual forecast. A study of the Blue Chip Economic Indicators survey, for instance, found that the aggregate forecast was better over a multiyear period than the forecasts issued by any one of the seventy economists that made up the panel.15 Another study by Wolfers, looking at predictions of NFL football games, found that the consensus forecasts produced by betting markets were better than about 99.5 percent of those from individual handicappers.16 And this is certainly true of political polling; models that treat any one poll as the Holy Grail are more prone to embarrassing failures.17 Reducing error by 15 or 20 percent by combining forecasts may not sound all that impressive, but it's awfully hard to beat in a competitive market.

So I told Wolfers and Rothschild that I was ready to accept the principle behind their conclusion, if not all the details. After all, bettors at Intrade can use FiveThirtyEight's forecasts to make their predictions as well as whatever other information they deem to be relevant (like the forecasts issued by our competitors, some of which are also very good). Of course, the bettors could interpret that information in a biased fashion and get themselves into trouble. But it is not like the FiveThirtyEight forecasts—or anybody else's—are beyond reproach.

Wolfers seemed disappointed that I was willing to concede so much ground. If I wasn't sure I could beat Intrade, why not just join them and adopt their predictions as my own?

"I'm surprised by your reaction, actually," he told me. "If there's something else that should beat it and does beat it, what's the point of doing what you're doing?"

For one thing, I find making the forecasts intellectually interesting—and they help to produce traffic for my blog.

Also, while I accept the theoretical benefits of prediction markets, I don't know that political betting markets like Intrade are all that good right now—the standard of competition is fairly low. Intrade is becoming more popular, but it is still small potatoes compared with the stock market or Las Vegas. In the weeks leading up to the Super Tuesday primaries in March 2012, for instance, about $1.6 million in shares were traded there;18 by contrast, $8 million is traded in the New York Stock Exchange in a single second. The biggest profit made by any one trader from his Super Tuesday bets was about $9,000, which is not enough to make a living, let alone to get rich. Meanwhile, Intrade is in a legal gray area and most of the people betting on American politics are from Europe or from other countries. There have also been some cases of market manipulation*19 or blatant irrational pricing20 there. And these markets haven't done very well at aggregating information in instances where there isn't much information worth aggregating, like in trying to guess the outcome of Supreme Court cases from the nebulous clues the justices provide to the public.

Could FiveThirtyEight and other good political forecasters beat Intrade if it were fully legal in the United States and its trading volumes were an order of magnitude or two higher? I'd think it would be difficult. Can they do so right now? My educated guess21 is that some of us still can, if we select our bets carefully.22

Then again, a lot of smart people have failed miserably when they thought they could beat the market.

The Origin of Efficient-Market Hypothesis

In 1959, a twenty-year-old college student named Eugene Fama, bored with the Tufts University curriculum of romance languages and Voltaire, took a job working for a professor who ran a stock market forecasting service.23 The job was a natural fit for him; Fama was a fierce competitor who had been the first in his family to go to college and who had been a star athlete at Boston's Malden Catholic High School despite standing at just five feet eight. He combed through data on past stock market returns looking for anything that could provide an investor with an advantage, frequently identifying statistical patterns that suggested the stock market was highly predictable and an investor could make a fortune by exploiting them. The professor almost always responded skeptically, advising Fama to wait and see how the strategies performed in the real world before starting to invest in them. Almost always, Fama's strategies failed.

Equally frustrated and fascinated by the experience, Fama abandoned his plans to become a high school teacher and instead enrolled at the University of Chicago's Graduate School of Business, where in 1965 he managed to get his Ph.D. thesis published. The paper had something of the flavor of the baseball statistician Bill James's pioneering work during the 1980s, leaning on a mix of statistics and sarcasm to claim that much of the conventional wisdom about how stocks behaved was pure baloney. Studying the returns of dozens of mutual funds in a ten-year period from 1950 to 1960, Fama found that funds that performed well in one year were no more likely to beat their competition the next time around.24 Although he had been unable to beat the market, nobody else really could either:

A superior analyst is one whose gains . . . are consistently greater than those of the market. Consistency is the crucial word here, since for any given short period of time . . . some people will do much better than the market and some will do much worse.

Unfortunately, by this criterion, this author does not qualify as a superior analyst. There is some consolation, however . . . . [O]ther more market-tested institutions do not seem to qualify either.25

The paper, although it would later be cited more than 4,000 times,26 at first received about as much attention as most things published by University of Chicago graduate students.27 But it had laid the groundwork for efficient-market hypothesis. The central claim of the theory is that the movement of the stock market is unpredictable to any meaningful extent. Some investors inevitably perform better than others over short periods of time—just as some gamblers inevitably win at roulette on any given evening in Las Vegas. But, Fama claimed, they weren't able to make good enough predictions to beat the market over the long run.

Past Performance Is Not Indicative of Future Results

Very often, we fail to appreciate the limitations imposed by small sample sizes and mistake luck for skill when we look at how well someone's predictions have done. The reverse can occasionally also be true, such as in examining the batting averages of baseball players over short time spans: there is skill there, perhaps even quite a bit of it, but it is drowned out by noise.

In the stock market, the data on the performance of individual traders is noisy enough that it's very hard to tell whether they are any good at all. "Past performance is not indicative of future results" appears in mutual-fund brochures for a reason.

Suppose that in 2007 you wanted to invest in a mutual fund, one that focused mostly on large-capitalization American stocks like those that make up the Dow Jones Industrial Average or the S&P 500. You went to E*Trade, which offered literally hundreds of choices of such funds and all sorts of information about them, like the average return they had achieved over the prior five years. Surely you would have been better off investing in a fund like EVTMX (Eaton Vance Dividend Builder A), which had beaten the market by almost 10 percent annually from 2002 through 2006? Or if you were feeling more daring, JSVAX (Janus Contrarian T), which had invested in some unpopular stocks but had bettered the market by 9 percent annually during this period?

Actually, it wouldn't have made any difference. When I looked at how these mutual funds performed from 2002 through 2006, and compared it with how they performed over the next five years from 2007 through 2011, there was literally no correlation between them. EVTMX, the best-performing fund from 2002 through 2006, was only average over the next five years. And high-performing JSVAX was 3 percent worse per year than the market average. As Fama found, there was just no consistency in how well a fund did, even over five-year increments. Other studies have identified very modest correlations in mutual fund performance from year to year,28 but it's so hard to tell them apart (figure 11-3)29 that you're best off just selecting the one with the cheapest fees—or eschewing them entirely and investing in the market yourself.

The Misery of the Chartist

Fama reserved his harshest criticism, however, for what he called "chartists"—people who claim to be able to predict the direction of stock prices (as Fama had tried and failed to do) solely on the basis of past statistical patterns, without worrying about whether the company had made a profit or a loss or whether it sold airplanes or hamburgers. (The more polite term for this activity is technical analysis.)

Perhaps we should have some sympathy for the poor chartist: distinguishing the noise from the signal is not always so easy. In figure 11-4, I have presented a series of six stock market charts. Four of them are fakes and were literally generated by telling my computer to flip a coin* (or rather, pick a random series of 1's and 0's). The other two are real and depict the actual movement of the Dow Jones Industrial Average over the first 1,000 trading days of the 1970s and 1980s, respectively. Can you tell which is which? It isn't so easy. (The answer is in the endnotes.30) Investors were looking at stock-price movements like these and were mistaking noise for a signal.

FIGURE 11-4: RANDOM-WALK AND ACTUAL STOCK-MARKET CHARTS

Three Forms of Efficient-Market Hypothesis

After looking at enough of this type of data, Fama refined his hypothesis to cover three distinct cases,31 each one making a progressively bolder claim about the predictability of markets.

First, there is the weak form of efficient-market hypothesis. What this claims is that stock-market prices cannot be predicted from analyzing past statistical patterns alone. In other words, the chartist's techniques are bound to fail.

The semistrong form of efficient-market hypothesis takes things a step further. It argues that fundamental analysis—meaning, actually looking at publicly available information on a company's financial statements, its business model, macroeconomic conditions and so forth—is also bound to fail and will also not produce returns that consistently beat the market.

Finally, there is the strong form of efficient-market hypothesis, which claims that even private information—insider secrets—will quickly be incorporated into market prices and will not produce above-average returns. This version of efficient-market hypothesis is meant more as the logical extreme of the theory and is not believed literally by most proponents of efficient markets (including Fama.32) There is fairly unambiguous evidence, instead, that insiders make above-average returns. One disturbing example is that members of Congress, who often gain access to inside information about a company while they are lobbied and who also have some ability to influence the fate of companies through legislation, return a profit on their investments that beats market averages by 5 to 10 percent per year,33 a remarkable rate that would make even Bernie Madoff blush.

But the debates over the weak form and semistrong forms of the hypothesis have been perhaps the hottest topic in all the social sciences. Almost nine hundred academic papers are published on the efficient-market hypothesis every year,34 and it is now discussed almost as often in financial journals35 as the theory of evolution is discussed in biological ones.36

Efficient-market hypothesis is sometimes mistaken for an excuse for the excesses of Wall Street; whatever else those guys are doing, it seems to assert, at least they're behaving rationally. A few proponents of the efficient-market hypothesis might interpret it in that way. But as the theory was originally drafted, it really makes just the opposite case: the stock market is fundamentally and profoundly unpredictable. When something is truly unpredictable, nobody from your hairdresser to the investment banker making $2 million per year is able to beat it consistently.

However, as powerful as the theory claims to be, it comes with a few qualifications. The most important is that it pertains to returns on a risk-adjusted basis. Suppose you pursue an investment strategy that entails a 10 percent chance of going broke every year. This is exceptionally foolish—if you followed the strategy over a twenty-year investment horizon, there's only a 12 percent chance that your money would live to tell about it. But if you are that ballsy, you deserve an excess profit. All versions of the efficient-market hypothesis allow for investors to make an above-average return provided it's proportionate to the additional risks they are taking on.

Another important qualification is that profits are measured net of the cost of trading. Investors incur transaction costs every time they trade a stock. These costs are fairly small in most circumstances—perhaps 0.25 percent of a trade.37 But they accumulate the more often you trade and can be quite devastating to an overactive trader. This gives efficient-market hypothesis a bit of a buffer zone. Some investment strategies might be a tiny bit profitable in a world where trading was free. But in the real world, a trader needs to earn a large enough profit to cover this additional expense, in somewhat the same way that a winning poker player needs to beat the game by a large enough margin to cover the house's take.

A Statistical Test of Efficient-Market Hypothesis

Opponents of efficient-market hypothesis have two good ways to attempt to disprove it. One is to demonstrate that some investors are consistently beating the stock market. The other is more direct: illustrate predictability in the returns.

One simple way to refute the hypothesis would be to demonstrate that stock-price movements are correlated from one day to the next. If the stock market rises on Tuesday, does that mean it is also more likely to rise on Wednesday? If so, that means that an investor could potentially benefit through a simple strategy of buying stocks each day that the market rises and selling them or shorting them each time that it declines. Depending on how large the investor's transaction costs were, he might be able to beat the market in this way.

Suppose that we looked at the daily closing price of the Dow Jones Industrial Average in the 10 years between 1966 and 1975—the decade just after Fama had published his thesis. Over this period, the Dow moved in the same direction from day to day—a gain was followed by a gain or a loss by a loss—58 percent of the time. It switched directions just 42 percent of the time. That seems nonrandom and it is: a standard statistical test38 would have claimed that there was only about a 1-in-7 quintillion possibility (1 chance in 7,000,000,000,000,000) that this resulted from chance alone.

But statistical significance does not always equate to practical significance. An investor could not have profited from this trend.

Suppose that an investor had observed this pattern for ten years—gains tended to be followed by gains and losses by losses. On the morning of January 2, 1976, he decided to invest $10,000 in an index fund39 which tracked the Dow Jones Industrial Average. But he wasn't going to be a passive investor. Instead he'd pursue what he called a Manic Momentum strategy to exploit the pattern. Every time the stock market declined over the day, he would pull all his money out, avoiding what he anticipated would be another decline the next day. He'd hold his money out of the market until he observed a day that the market rose, and then he would put it all back in. He would pursue this strategy for ten years, until the last trading day of 1985, at which point he would cash out his holdings for good, surely assured of massive profits.

How much money would this investor have at the end of the ten-year period? If you ignore dividends, inflation, and transaction costs, his $10,000 investment in 1976 would have been worth about $25,000 ten years later using the Manic Momentum strategy. By contrast, an investor who had adopted a simple buy-and-hold strategy during the same decade—buy $10,000 in stocks on January 2, 1976, and hold them for ten years, making no changes in the interim—would have only about $18,000 at the end of the period. Manic Momentum seems to have worked! Our investor, using a very basic strategy that exploited a simple statistical relationship in past market prices, substantially beat the market average, seeming to disprove the efficient-market hypothesis in the process.

But there is a catch. We ignored this investor's transaction costs. This makes an enormous difference. Suppose that the investor had pursued the Manic Momentum strategy as before but that each time he cashes into or out of the market, he paid his broker a commission of 0.25 percent. Since this investor's strategy requires buying or selling shares hundreds of times during this period, these small costs will nickel-and-dime him to death. If you account for his transaction costs, in fact, the $10,000 investment in the Manic Momentum strategy would have been worth only about $1,100 ten years later, eliminating not only his profit but also almost all the money he put in originally. In this case, there is just a little bit of predictability in stock-market returns—but not nearly enough to make a profit from them, and so efficient-market hypothesis is not violated.

The other catch is that the pattern has since reversed itself. During the 2000s, the stock market changed direction from day to day about 54 percent of the time, just the opposite of the pattern from earlier decades. Had the investor pursued his Manic Momentum strategy for ten years beginning in January 2000, his $10,000 investment would have been whittled down to $4,000 by the end of the decade even before considering transaction costs.40 If you do consider transaction costs, the investor would have had just $141 left over by the end of the decade, having lost almost 99 percent of his capital.

In other words: do not try this stuff at home. Strategies like these resemble a high-stakes game of rock-paper-scissors at best,* and the high transaction costs they entail will deprive you of any profit and eat into much of your principal. As Fama and his professor had discovered, stock-market strategies that seem too good to be true usually are. Like the historical patterns on the frequency of earthquakes, stock market data seems to occupy a sort of purgatory wherein it is not quite random but also not quite predictable. Here, however, matters are made worse because stock market data ultimately describes not some natural phenomenon but the collective actions of human beings. If you do detect a pattern, particularly an obvious-seeming one, the odds are that other investors will have found it as well, and the signal will begin to cancel out or even reverse itself.

Efficient Markets Meet Irrational Exuberance

A more significant challenge to the theory comes from a sustained increase in stock prices, such as occurred in technology stocks during the late 1990s and early 2000s. From late 1998 through early 2000, the NASDAQ composite index more than tripled in value before all those gains (and then some) were wiped out over the two years that followed.

Some of the prices listed on the NADSAQ seemed to be plainly irrational. At one point during the dot-com boom, the market value of technology companies accounted for about 35 percent of the value of all stocks in the United States,41 implying they would soon come to represent more than a third of private-sector profits. What's interesting is that the technology itself has in some ways exceeded our expectations. Can you imagine what an investor in 2000 would have done if you had shown her an iPad? And told her that, within ten years, she could use it to browse the Internet on an airplane flying 35,000 feet over Missouri and make a Skype call* to her family in Hong Kong? She would have bid Apple stock up to infinity.

Nevertheless, ten years later, in 2010, technology companies accounted for only about 7 percent of economic activity.42 For every Apple, there were dozens of companies like Pets.com that went broke. Investors were behaving as though every company would be a winner, that they wouldn't have to outcompete each other, leading to an utterly unrealistic assumption about the potential profits available to the industry as a whole.

Still, some proponents of efficient-market hypothesis continue to resist the notion of bubbles. Fama, in what was otherwise a very friendly conversation, recoiled when I so much as mentioned the b-word. "That term has totally lost its meaning," he told me emphatically. "A bubble is something that has a predictable ending. If you can't tell you're in a bubble, it's not a bubble."

In order for a bubble to violate efficient-market hypothesis, it needs to be predictable in real-time. Some investors need to identify it as it is happening and then exploit it for a profit.

Identifying a bubble is of course much easier with the benefit of hindsight—but frankly, it does not seem all that challenging to do so in advance, as many economists did while the housing bubble was underway. Simply looking at periods when the stock market has increased at a rate much faster than its historical average can give you some inkling of a bubble. Of the eight times in which the S&P 500 increased in value by twice its long-term average over a five-year period,43 five cases were followed by a severe and notorious crash, such as the Great Depression, the dot-com bust, or the Black Monday crash of 1987.44

A more accurate and sophisticated bubble-detection method is proposed by the Yale economist Robert J. Shiller, whose prescient work on the housing bubble I discussed in chapter 1. Shiller is best known for his book Irrational Exuberance. Published right as the NASDAQ achieved its all-time high during the dot-com bubble, the book served as an antidote to others, such as Dow 36,000, Dow 40,000 and Dow 100,00045 that promised prices would keep going up, instead warning investors that stocks were badly overpriced on the basis of the fundamentals.

In theory, the value of a stock is a prediction of a company's future earnings and dividends. Although earnings may be hard to predict, you can look at what a company has made in the recent past (Shiller's formula uses the past ten years of earnings) and compare it with the value of the stock. This calculation—known as the P/E or price-to-earnings ratio—has gravitated toward a value of about 15 over the long run, meaning that the market price per share is generally about fifteen times larger than a company's annual profits.

There are exceptions in individual stocks, and sometimes they are justified. A company in an emerging industry (say, Facebook) might reasonably expect to make more in future years than in past ones. It therefore deserves a higher P/E ratio than a company in a declining industry (say, Blockbuster Video). Shiller, however, looked at the P/E ratio averaged across all companies in the S&P 500. In theory, over this broad average of businesses, the high P/E ratios for companies in emerging industries should be balanced out by those in declining ones and the market P/E ratio should be fairly constant across time.

But Shiller found that this had not been the case. At various times, the P/E ratio for all companies in the S&P 500 ranged everywhere from about 5 (in 1921) to 44 (when Shiller published his book in 2000). Shiller found that these anomalies had predictable-seeming consequences for investors. When the P/E ratio is 10, meaning that stocks are cheap compared with earnings, they have historically produced a real return46 of about 9 percent per year, meaning that a $10,000 investment would be worth $22,000 ten years later. When the P/E ratio is 25, on the other hand, a $10,000 investment in the stock market has historically been worth just $12,000 ten years later. And when they are very high, above about 30—as they were in 1929 or 2000—the expected return has been negative.

However, these pricing patterns would not have been very easy to profit from unless you were very patient. They've become meaningful only in the long term, telling you almost nothing about what the market will be worth one month or one year later. Even looking several years in advance, they have only limited predictive power. Alan Greenspan first used the phrase "irrational exuberance" to describe technology stocks in December 1996,47 at which point the P/E ratio of the S&P 500 was 28—not far from the previous record of 33 in 1929 in advance of Black Tuesday and the Great Depression. The NASDAQ was more richly valued still. But the peak of the bubble was still more than three years away. An investor with perfect foresight, who had bought the NASDAQ on the day that Greenspan made his speech, could have nearly quadrupled his money if he sold out at exactly the right time. Instead, it's really only at time horizons ten or twenty years out that these P/E ratios have allowed investors to make reliable predictions.

There is very little that is truly certain about the stock market,* and even this pattern could reflect some combination of signal and noise.48 Still, Shiller's findings are backed by strong theory as well as strong empirical evidence, since his focus on P/E ratios ties back to the fundamentals of stock market valuation, making it more likely that they have evinced something real.

So how could stock prices be so predictable in the long run if they are so unpredictable in the short run? The answer lies in how traders behave in the competitive pressures that traders face—both from their rival firms and from their clients and their bosses.

Much of the theoretical appeal of efficient-market hypothesis is that errors in stock prices (like Bayesian beliefs) should correct themselves. Suppose you've observed that the stock price of MGM Resorts International, a large gambling company, increases by 10 percent every Friday, perhaps because traders are subconsciously looking forward to blowing their profits in Atlantic City over the weekend. On a particular Friday, MGM starts out priced at $100, so you expect it to rise to $110 by the end of the trading day. What should you do? You should buy the stock, of course, expecting to make a quick profit. But when you buy the stock, its price goes up. A large enough trade49 might send the price up to $102 from $100. There's still some profit there, so you buy the stock again and its price rises to $104. You keep doing this until the stock reaches its fair price of $110 and there are no more profits left. But look what happened: in the act of detecting this pricing anomaly, you have managed to eliminate it.

In the real world, the patterns will be nowhere near this obvious. There are millions of traders out there, including hundreds of analysts who concentrate on the gambling industry alone. How likely is it that you will have been the only one to have noticed that this stock always rises by 10 percent on Friday? Instead, you're usually left fighting over some scraps: a statistical pattern that might or might not be meaningful, that might or might not continue into the future and that might or might not be profitable enough to cover your transaction costs—and that other investors are competing with you to exploit. Nevertheless, all that competition means that the market should quickly adjust to large pricing errors and that the small ones may not be worth worrying about. At least that's how the theory goes.

But most traders, and especially the most active traders, are very short-term focused. They will arbitrage any profit opportunity that involves thinking a day, a month, or perhaps a year ahead, but they may not care very much about what happens beyond that. There may still be some predictability out there; it is just not within their job description to exploit it.

FIGURE 11-7: TRAILING P/E RATIOS AND STOCK MARKET RETURNS

The Stampeding Herd

Henry Blodget first came to the nation's attention in 1998. After some meandering years split between freelance journalism and teaching English in Japan,50 he had settled in at a job analyzing Internet stocks for the company CIBC Oppenheimer. As attention to Internet stocks increased, attention to Blodget's analysis did as well, and in December 1998 he issued a particularly bold call51 in which he predicted that the shares of Amazon.com, then valued at $243, would rise to $400 within a year. In fact, they broke the $400 barrier barely two weeks later.52

Such was the mania of the time that this may even have been a self-fulfilling prophecy: Amazon stock jumped nearly 25 percent53 within a few hours on the basis of Blodget's recommendation. The call helped catapult Blodget to fame and he took a multimillion-dollar job as an analyst for Merrill Lynch. Blodget has a particular gift54 for distilling the zeitgeist of the market into coherent sentences. "What investors are buying," Blodget said of Internet stocks in 1998,55 "is a particular vision of the future." His way with words and reputation for success led to ubiquitous television and radio appearances.

Blodget's call on Amazon still looks pretty good today: the shares he recommended at a price of $243 in 1998 would have traded as high as $1,300 by 2011 if measured on the same scale.56 He urged investors to pay for value, concentrating on industry leaders like Amazon, Yahoo!, and eBay and noting that most of the smaller companies would "merge, go bankrupt, or quietly fade away."57 In private correspondence, he trashed small companies with dubious business strategies—LifeMinders, Inc., 24/7 Media, and InfoSpace—all of which turned out to be pretty much worthless and lost 95 to 100 percent of their value.

The problem, the big problem, is that despite criticizing them privately, Blodget had recommended stocks like LifeMinders publicly, maintaining buy ratings on them and defending them on TV. Moreover, the discrepancies seemed to favor companies with whom Merrill did banking business.58 Later charged with fraud by the Securities and Exchange Commission,59 Blodget disputed some details of the case but eventually settled for a $4 million fine60 and a lifetime ban from stock trading.

Blodget knows that whatever he says about Wall Street will be taken skeptically; a piece he once wrote for Slate magazine on the Martha Stewart trial had a 1,021-word disclosure statement attached to it.61 He has had time, however, to digest the work of economists like Fama and Shiller and compare it with his actual experience as a Wall Street insider. He has also embarked on a new career as a journalist—Blodget is now the CEO of the highly successful blogging empire Business Insider. All this has given him a mature if somewhat jaded perspective on the lives of analysts and traders.

"If you talk to a lot of investment managers," Blodget told me, "the practical reality is they're thinking about the next week, possibly the next month or quarter. There isn't a time horizon; it's how you're doing now, relative to your competitors. You really only have ninety days to be right, and if you're wrong within ninety days, your clients begin to fire you. You get shamed in the media, and your performance goes to hell. Fundamentals do not help you with that."

Consider what would happen if a trader had read Shiller's book and accepted its basic premise that high P/E ratios signal an overvalued market. However, the trader cared only about the next ninety days. Historically, even when the P/E ratio in the market has been above 30—meaning that stock valuations are twice as high as they are ordinarily—the odds of a crash62 over the next ninety days have been only about 4 percent.

If the trader had an unusually patient boss and got to look a whole year ahead, he'd find that the odds of a crash rose to about 19 percent (figure 11-8). This is about the same as the odds of losing a game of Russian roulette. The trader knows that he cannot play this game too many times before he gets burned. But what, realistically, are his alternatives?

FIGURE 11-8: HISTORICAL ODDS OF STOCK MARKET CRASH WITHIN ONE YEAR

This trader must make a call—buy or sell. Then the market will crash or it will not. So there are four basic scenarios to consider. First, there are the two cases in which he turns out to have made the right bet:

The trader buys and the market rises. In this case, it's business as usual. Everyone is happy when the stock market makes money. The trader gets a six-figure bonus and uses it to buy a new Lexus.

The trader sells and the market crashes. If the trader anticipates a crash and a crash occurs, he will look like a genius for betting on it when few others did. There's a chance that he'll get a significantly better job—as a partner at a hedge fund, for instance. Still, even geniuses aren't always in demand after the market crashes and capital is tight. More likely, this will translate into something along the lines of increased media exposure: a favorable write-up in the Wall Street Journal, a book deal, a couple of invitations to cool conferences, and so forth.

Which of these outcomes you prefer will depend significantly on your personality. The first is great for someone who enjoys the Wall Street life and likes to fit in with the crowd; the second for someone who enjoys being an iconoclast. It may be no coincidence that many of the successful investors profiled in Michael Lewis's The Big Short, who made money betting against mortgage-backed securities and other bubbly investments of the late 2000s, were social misfits to one degree or another.

But now consider what happens when the investor gets his bet wrong. This choice is much clearer.

The trader buys but the market crashes. This is no fun: he's lost his firm a lot of money and there will be no big bonus and no new Lexus. But since he's stayed with the herd, most of his colleagues will have made the same mistake. Following the last three big crashes on Wall Street, employment at securities firms decreased by about 20 percent.63 That means there is an 80 percent chance the trader keeps his job and comes out okay; the Lexus can wait until the next bull market.

The trader sells but the market rises. This scenario, however, is a disaster. Not only will the trader have significantly underperformed his peers—he'll have done so after having stuck his neck out and screaming that they were fools. It is extremely likely that he will be fired. And he will not be well-liked, so his prospects for future employment will be dim. His career earnings potential will have been dramatically reduced.

If I'm this trader, a 20 percent chance of a crash would be nowhere near enough for me to take the sell side of the bet. Nor would a 50 percent chance. I'd want a crash to be a near-certainty before I'd be ready to take the plunge, and I'd want everyone else to be in the sinking ship with me.

Indeed, the big brokerage firms tend to avoid standing out from the crowd, downgrading a stock only after its problems have become obvious.64 In October 2001, fifteen of the seventeen analysts following Enron still had a "buy" or "strong buy" recommendation on the stock65 even though it had already lost 50 percent of its value in the midst of the company's accounting scandal. Even if these firms know that the party is coming to an end, it may nevertheless be in their best interest to prolong it for as long as they can. "We thought it was the eighth inning, and it was the ninth," the hedge fund manager Stanley Druckenmiller told the New York Times66 in April 2000 after his Quantum Fund had lost 22 percent of its value in just a few months. Druckenmiller knew that technology stocks were overvalued and were bound to decline—he just did not expect it to happen so soon.

In today's stock market, most trades are made with someone else's money (in Druckenmiller's case, mostly George Soros's). The 1990s and 2000s are sometimes thought of as the age of the day trader. But holdings by institutional investors like mutual funds, hedge funds, and pensions have increased at a much faster rate (figure 11-9). When Fama drafted his thesis in the 1960s, only about 15 percent of stocks were held by institutions rather than individuals.67 By 2007, the percentage had risen to 68 percent.68, 69

These statistics represent a potential complication for efficient-market hypothesis: when it's not your own money on the line but someone else's, your incentives may change. Under some circumstances, in fact, it may be quite rational for traders to take positions that lose money for their firms and their investors if it allows them to stay with the herd and reduces their chance of getting fired.70 There is significant theoretical and empirical evidence71 for herding behavior among mutual funds and other institutional investors.72 "The answer as to why bubbles form," Blodget told me, "is that it's in everybody's interest to keep markets going up."

FIGURE 11-9: INDIVIDUAL AND INSTITUTIONAL INVESTOR TOTAL EQUITY HOLDINGS, UNITED STATES (ADJUSTED FOR INFLATION)73

Everything I've described up to this point could result from perfectly rational behavior on the part of individual participants in the market. It is almost as though the investors are responding hyper-rationally to their career incentives, but not necessarily seeking to maximize their firm's trading profits. One conceit of economics is that markets as a whole can perform fairly rationally, even if many of the participants within them are irrational. But irrational behavior in the markets may result precisely because individuals are responding rationally according to their incentives. So long as most traders are judged on the basis of short-term performance, bubbles involving large deviations of stock prices from their long-term values are possible—and perhaps even inevitable.

Why We Herd

Herding can also result from deeper psychological reasons. Most of the time when we are making a major life decision, we're going to want some input from our family, neighbors, colleagues, and friends—and even from our competitors if they are willing to give it.

If I have a forecast that says Rafael Nadal has a 30 percent chance of winning Wimbledon and all the tennis fans I encounter say he has a 50 percent chance instead, I'd need to be very, very sure of myself to stick to my original position. Unless I had some unique information that they weren't privy to, or I were truly convinced that I had spent much more time analyzing the problem than they had, the odds are that my iconoclastic view is just going to lose money. The heuristic of "follow the crowd, especially when you don't know any better" usually works pretty well.

And yet, there are those times when we become too trusting of our neighbors—like in the 1980s "Just Say No" commercials, we do something because Everyone Else Is Doing it Too. Instead of our mistakes canceling one another out, which is the idea behind the wisdom of crowds,74 they instead begin to reinforce one another and spiral out of control. The blind lead the blind and everyone falls off a cliff. This phenomenon occurs fairly rarely, but it can be quite disastrous when it does.

Sometimes we may also infer that the most confident-acting neighbor must be the best forecaster and follow his lead—whether he knows what he's doing. In 2008, for reasons that are still somewhat unclear, a rogue trader on Intrade started buying huge volumes of John McCain stock in the middle of the night when there was absolutely no news, while dumping huge volumes of Barack Obama stock.75 Eventually the anomalies were corrected, but it took some time—often four to six hours—before prices fully rebounded to their previous values. Many traders were convinced that the rogue trader knew something they didn't—perhaps he had inside information about some impending scandal?

This is herding. And there's evidence that it's becoming more and more common in markets. The correlations in the price movements between different stocks and different types of assets are becoming sharper and sharper,76 suggesting that everybody is investing in a little bit of everything and trying to exploit many of the same strategies. This is another of those Information Age risks: we share so much information that our independence is reduced. Instead, we seek out others who think just like us and brag about how many "friends" and "followers" we have.

In the market, prices may occasionally follow the lead of the worst investors. They are the ones making most of the trades.

Overconfidence and the Winner's Curse

A common experiment in economics classrooms, usually employed when the professor needs some extra lunch money, is to hold an auction wherein students submit bids on the number of pennies in a jar.77 The student with the highest bid pays the professor and wins the pennies (or an equivalent amount in paper money if he doesn't like loose change). Almost invariably, the winning student will find that he has paid too much. Although some of the students' bids are too low and some are about right, it's the student who most overestimates the value of the coins in the jar who is obligated to pay for them; the worst forecaster takes the "prize." This is known as the "winner's curse."

The stock market has some of the same properties. Every now and then, the trader most willing to buy a stock will be the one who really does have some unique or proprietary insight about a company. But most traders are about average, and they're using mostly the same models with most of the same data. If they decide a stock is substantially undervalued when their peers disagree, most of the time it will be because they've placed too much confidence in their forecasting abilities and mistaken the noise in their model for a signal.

There is reason to suspect that of the various cognitive biases that investors suffer from, overconfidence is the most pernicious. Perhaps the central finding of behavioral economics is that most of us are overconfident when we make predictions. The stock market is no exception; a Duke University survey of corporate CFOs,78 whom you might expect to be fairly sophisticated investors, found that they radically overestimated their ability to forecast the price of the S&P 500. They were constantly surprised by large movements in stock prices, despite the stock market's long history of behaving erratically over short time periods.

The economist Terrance Odean of the University of California at Berkeley constructed a model in which traders had this flaw and this flaw only: they were overconfident in estimating the value of their information. Otherwise, they were perfectly rational.79 What Odean found was that overconfidence alone was enough to upset an otherwise rational market. Markets with overconfident traders will produce extremely high trading volumes, increased volatility, strange correlations in stock prices from day to day, and below-average returns for active traders—all the things that we observe in the real world.

Why It's Hard to Bust Bubbles

And yet, if the market is trending toward a bubble, efficient-market hypothesis would imply that some traders should step in to stop it, expecting to make enormous profits by selling the stock short. Eventually, the theory will be right: all bubbles burst. However, they can take a long time to pop.

The way to bet against an overvalued stock is to short it: you borrow shares at their current price with the promise of returning them at some point in the future based on their price at that time. If the stock goes down in value, you will make money on this trade. The problem comes if the stock goes up in value, in which case you will owe more money than you had borrowed originally. Say, for instance, that you had borrowed five hundred shares of the company InfoSpace on March 2, 1999, when they cost $27, promising to return them one year later. Borrowing these shares would have cost you about $13,400. One year later, however, InfoSpace was trading at $482 per share, meaning that you would be obligated to return about $240,000—almost twenty times the initial value of your investment. Although this bet would have turned out to be brilliant in the end—InfoSpace later traded for as little as $1.40 per share—you would have taken a bath and your ability to make future investments would be crippled. In fact, the losses from shorting a stock are theoretically unlimited.

In practice, the investor loaning you the shares can demand them back anytime she wants, as she assuredly will if she thinks you are a credit risk. But this also means she can quit anytime she's ahead, an enormous problem since overvalued stocks often become even more overvalued before reverting back to fairer prices. Moreover, since the investor loaning you the stocks knows that you may have to dig into your savings to pay her back, she will charge you a steep interest rate for the privilege. Bubbles can take months or years to deflate. As John Maynard Keynes said, "The market can stay irrational longer than you can stay solvent."

The Price Isn't Right

At other times, investors may not have the opportunity to short stocks at all. One somewhat infamous example, documented by the University of Chicago economists Richard Thaler and Owen Lamont,80 is when the company 3Com spun off shares of its mobile phone subsidiary Palm into a separate stock offering. 3Com kept most of Palm's shares for itself, however, so a trader could also invest in Palm simply by buying 3Com stock. In particular, 3Com stockholders were guaranteed to receive three shares in Palm for every two shares in 3Com that they held. This seemed to imply Palm shares could trade at an absolute maximum of two-thirds the value of 3Com shares.

Palm, however, was a sexy stock at the time, whereas 3Com, although it had consistently earned a profit, had a stodgy reputation. Rather than being worth less than 3Com shares, Palm shares instead traded at a higher price for a period of several months. This should have allowed an investor, regardless of what he thought about Palm and 3Com, to make a guaranteed profit by buying 3Com shares and shorting Palm. On paper, it was a virtually no-risk arbitrage opportunity,81 the equivalent of exchanging $1,000 for £600 British pounds at Heathrow Airport in London knowing you could exchange the £600 for $1,500 when you got off the flight in New York.

But shorting Palm proved to be very difficult. Few holders of Palm stock were willing to loan their shares out, and they had come to expect quite a premium for doing so: an interest rate of well over 100 percent per year.82 This pattern was common during the dot-com bubble:83 shorting dot-com stocks was prohibitively expensive when it wasn't literally impossible.

I met with Thaler after we both spoke at a conference in Las Vegas, where we ate an overpriced sushi dinner and observed the action on the Strip. Thaler, although a friend and colleague of Fama's, has been at the forefront of a discipline called behavioral economics that has been a thorn in the side of efficient-market hypothesis. Behavioral economics points out all the ways in which traders in the real-world are not as well-behaved as in the model.

"Efficient-market hypothesis has two components," Thaler told me between bites of toro. "One I call the No Free Lunch component, which is that you can't beat the market. Eugene Fama and I mostly agree about this component. The part he doesn't like to talk about is the Price Is Right component."

There is reasonably strong evidence for what Thaler calls No Free Lunch—it is difficult (although not literally impossible) for any investor to beat the market over the long-term. Theoretically appealing opportunities may be challenging to exploit in practice because of transaction costs, risks, and other constraints on trading. Statistical patterns that have been reliable in the past may prove to be ephemeral once investors discover them.

The second claim of efficient-market hypothesis, what Thaler refers to as the Price Is Right component, is more dubious. Examples like the discrepancy in pricing between Palm and 3Com stock simply could not have arisen if the price were right. You had the same commodity (the value of an interest in Palm) trading at two different and wildly divergent prices: at least one of them must have been wrong.

There are asymmetries in the market: bubbles are easier to detect than to burst. What this means is that the ultimatum we face in Bayesland—if you really think the market is going to crash, why aren't you willing to bet on it?—does not necessarily hold in the real world, where there are constraints on trading and on capital.

Noise in Financial Markets

There is a kind of symbiosis between the irrational traders and the skilled ones—just as, in a poker game, good players need some fish at the table to make the game profitable to play in. In the financial literature, these irrational traders are known as "noise traders." As the economist Fisher Black wrote in a 1986 essay simply called "Noise":

Noise makes trading in financial markets possible, and thus allows us to observe prices for financial assets. [But] noise also causes markets to be somewhat inefficient. . . . Most generally, noise makes it very difficult to test either practical or academic theories about the way that financial or economic markets work. We are forced to act largely in the dark.84

Imagine there were no noise traders in the market. Everyone is betting on real information—signal. Prices are rational pretty much all the time, and the market is efficient.

But, if you think a market is efficient—efficient enough that you can't really beat it for a profit—then it would be irrational for you to place any trades. In fact, efficient-market hypothesis is intrinsically somewhat self-defeating. If all investors believed the theory—that they can't make any money from trading since the stock market is unbeatable—there would be no one left to make trades and therefore no market at all.

The paradox reminds me of an old joke among economists. One economist sees a $100 bill sitting on the street and reaches to grab it. "Don't bother," the other economist says. "If it were a real $100 bill, someone would already have picked it up." If everyone thought this way, of course, nobody would bother to pick up $100 bills until a naïve young lad who had never taken an economics course went about town scooping them up, then found out they were perfectly good and exchanged them for a new car.

The most workable solution to the paradox, identified by the Nobel Prize–winning economist Joseph Stiglitz and his colleague Sanford Grossman many years ago,85 is to allow some investors to make just a little bit of profit: just enough to adequately compensate them for the effort they put in. This would not actually be all that difficult to accomplish in the real world. Although it might seem objectionable to you that securities analysts on Wall Street are compensated at $75 billion per year, this pales in comparison to the roughly $17 trillion in trades86 that are made at the New York Stock Exchange alone. So long as they beat the market by 0.5 percent on their trades, they would be revenue-positive for their firms.

The equilibrium proposed by Stiglitz is one in which some minimal profits are available to some investors. Efficient-market hypothesis can't literally be true. Although some studies (like mine of mutual funds on E*Trade) seem to provide evidence for Fama's view that no investor can beat the market at all, others are more equivocal,87 and a few88 identify fairly tangible evidence of trading skill and excess profits. It probably isn't the mutual funds that are beating Wall Street; they follow too conventional a strategy and sink or swim together. But some hedge funds (not most) very probably beat the market,89 and some proprietary trading desks at elite firms like Goldman Sachs almost certainly do. There also seems to be rather clear evidence of trading skill among options traders,90 people who make bets on probabilistic assessments of how much a share price might move.* And while most individual, retail-level investors make common mistakes like trading too often and do worse than the market average, a select handful probably do beat the street.91

Buy High, Sell Low

You should not rush out and become an options trader. As the legendary investor Benjamin Graham advises, a little bit of knowledge can be a dangerous thing in the stock market.92 After all, any investor can do as well as the average investor with almost no effort. All he needs to do is buy an index fund that tracks the average of the S&P 500.93 In so doing he will come extremely close to replicating the average portfolio of every other trader, from Harvard MBAs to noise traders to George Soros's hedge fund manager. You have to be really good—or foolhardy—to turn that proposition down. In the stock market, the competition is fierce. The average trader, particularly in today's market, in which trading is dominated by institutional investors, is someone who will have ample credentials, a high IQ, and a fair amount of experience.

"Everybody thinks they have this supersmart mutual fund manager," Henry Blodget told me. "He went to Harvard and has been doing it for twenty-five years. How can he not be smart enough to beat the market? The answer is: Because there are nine million of him and they all have a fifty-million-dollar budget and computers that are collocated in the New York Stock Exchange. How could you possibly beat that?"

In practice, most everyday investors do not do even that well. Gallup and other polling organizations periodically survey Americans94 on whether they think it is a good time to buy stocks. Historically, there has been a strong relationship between these numbers and stock market performance—but the relationship runs in the exact opposite direction of what sound investment strategy would dictate. Americans tend to think it's a good time to buy when P/E ratios are inflated and stocks are overpriced. The highest figure that Gallup ever recorded in their survey was in January 2000, when a record high of 67 percent of Americans thought it was a good time to invest. Just two months later, the NASDAQ and other stock indices began to crash. Conversely, only 26 percent of Americans thought it was a good time to buy stocks in February 1990—but the S&P 500 almost quadrupled in value over the next ten years (figure 11-10).

Most of us will have to fight these instincts. "Investors need to learn how to do exactly the reverse of what their fight-or-flight mechanism is telling them to do," Blodget told me. "When the market crashes, that is the time to get excited and put your money into it. It's not the time to get scared and pull money out. What you see instead is the more the market drops, the more money comes out of it. Normal investors are obliterated, because they continuously do exactly the wrong thing."

As Blodget says, these mistakes can be exceptionally costly for investors. Suppose that you had invested $10,000 in the S&P 500 in 1970, planning to cash it out forty years later upon your retirement in 2009. There were plenty of ups and downs during this period. But if you stuck with your investment through thick and thin, you would have made a profit of $63,000 when you retired, adjusted for inflation and not counting the original principal.95 If instead you had "played it safe" by pulling your money out of the market every time it had fallen more than 25 percent from its previous peak, waiting until the market rebounded to 90 percent of its previous high before reinvesting, you would have just $18,000 in profit—a meager return of 2.6 percent per year.96 Many investors, unfortunately, behave in exactly this fashion. Worse yet, they tend to make their initial investments at times when the market is overvalued, in which case they may struggle to make a positive return of any kind over the long term.

The next time the market is in a bubble, you will see signals like the flashing lights in a casino drawing you ever closer: the CNBC ticker full of green arrows . . . Wall Street Journal headlines about record returns . . . commercials for online brokerages that make a fortune seem only a mouse-click away. Avoiding buying during a bubble, or selling during a panic, requires deliberate and conscious effort. You need to have the presence of mind to ignore it. Otherwise you will make the same mistakes that everyone else is making.

Daniel Kahneman likens the problem to the Müller-Lyer illusion, a famous optical illusion involving two sets of arrows (figure 11-11). The arrows are exactly the same length. But in one case, the ends of the arrows outward, seem to signify expansion and boundless potential. In the other case, they point inward, making them seem self-contained and limited. The first case is analogous to how investors see the stock market when returns have been increasing; the second case is how they see it after a crash.

FIGURE 11-11: MÜLLER-LYER ILLUSION

"There's no way that you can control yourself not to have that illusion," Kahneman told me. "You look at them, and one of the arrows is going to look longer than the other. But you can train yourself to recognize that this is a pattern that causes an illusion, and in that situation, I can't trust my impressions; I've got to use a ruler."

The Other 10 Percent

The cognitive shortcuts that our mind takes—our heuristics—are what get investors into trouble. The idea that something going up will continue to go up couldn't be any more instinctive. It just happens to be completely wrong when it comes to the stock market.

Our instincts related to herding may be an even more fundamental problem. Oftentimes, it will absolutely be right to do what everyone else is doing, or at least to pay some attention to it. If you travel to a strange city and need to pick a restaurant for dinner, you probably want to select the one that has more customers, other things being equal. But occasionally it will backfire: you wind up at the tourist trap.

Likewise, when we were making forecasts in Bayesland, it usually behooved us to pay some attention to what our neighbors and adjust our beliefs accordingly, rather than adopt the stubborn and often implausible notion that we knew better than everyone else.

I pay quite a bit of attention to what the consensus view is—what a market like Intrade is saying—when I make a forecast. It is never an absolute constraint. But the further I move away from that consensus, the stronger my evidence has to be before I come to the view that I have things right and everyone else has it wrong. This attitude, I think, will serve you very well most of the time. It implies that although you might occasionally be able to beat markets, it is not something you should count on doing every day; that is a sure sign of overconfidence.

But there are the exceptional cases. Fisher Black estimated that markets are basically rational 90 percent of the time. The other 10 percent of the time, the noise traders dominate—and they can go a little haywire.97 One way to look at this is that markets are usually very right but occasionally very wrong. This, incidentally, is another reason why bubbles are hard to pop in the real world. There might be a terrific opportunity to short a bubble or long a panic once every fifteen or twenty years when one comes along in your asset class. But it's very hard to make a steady career out of that, doing nothing for years at a time.

The Two-Track Market

Some theorists have proposed that we should think of the stock market as constituting two processes in one.98 There is the signal track, the stock market of the 1950s that we read about in textbooks. This is the market that prevails in the long run, with investors making relatively few trades, and prices well tied down to fundamentals. It helps investors to plan for their retirement and helps companies capitalize themselves.

Then there is the fast track, the noise track, which is full of momentum trading, positive feedbacks, skewed incentives and herding behavior. Usually it is just a rock-paper-scissors game that does no real good to the broader economy—but also perhaps also no real harm. It's just a bunch of sweaty traders passing money around.

However, these tracks happen to run along the same road, as though some city decided to hold a Formula 1 race but by some bureaucratic oversight forgot to close one lane to commuter traffic. Sometimes, like during the financial crisis, there is a big accident, and regular investors get run over.

This sort of duality, what the physicist Didier Sornette calls "the fight between order and disorder,"99 is common in complex systems, which are those governed by the interaction of many separate individual parts. Complex systems like these can at once seem very predictable and very unpredictable. Earthquakes are very well described by a few simple laws (we have a very good idea of the long-run frequency of a magnitude 6.5 earthquake in Los Angeles). And yet they are essentially unpredictable from day to day. Another characteristic of these systems is that they periodically undergo violent and highly nonlinear* phase changes from orderly to chaotic and back again. For Sornette and others who take highly mathematical views of the market, the presence of periodic bubbles seems more or less inevitable, an intrinsic property of the system.

I am partial toward this perspective. My view on trading markets (and toward free-market capitalism more generally) is the same as Winston Churchill's attitude toward democracy.100 I think it's the worst economic system ever invented—except for all the other ones. Markets do a good job most of the time, but I don't think we'll ever be rid of bubbles.

But if we can't fully prevent the herd behavior that causes bubbles, can we at least hope to detect them while they are occurring? Say you accept Black's premise that the market is behaving irrationally 10 percent of the time. Can we know when we're in that 10 percent phase? Then we might hope to profit from bubbles. Or, less selfishly, we could create softer landings that lessened the need for abhorrent taxpayer bailouts.

Bubble detection does not seem so hopeless. I don't think we're ever going to bat 100 percent, or even 50 percent, but I think we can get somewhere. Some of the bubbles of recent years, particularly the housing bubble, were detected by enormous numbers of people well in advance. And tests like Shiller's P/E ratio have been quite reliable indicators of bubbles in the past.

We could try to legislate our way out of the problem, but that can get tricky. If greater regulation might be called for in some cases, constraints on short-selling—which make it harder to pop bubbles—are almost certainly counter-productive.

What's clear, however, is that we'll never detect a bubble if we start from the presumption that markets are infallible and the price is always right. Markets cover up some of our warts and balance out some of our flaws. And they certainly aren't easy to outpredict. But sometimes the price is wrong.