Nate Silver.(2012).2018173The-Signal-and-the-Noise.Penguin Group => 0101





## 1301WHAT YOU DON'T KNOW CAN HURT YOU

Franklin Delano Roosevelt said December 7 would live in infamy. The bombing of Pearl Harbor in 1941, the first foreign attack on American soil in more than a century,1 was as shocking to the American psyche as the destruction of the World Trade Center sixty years later, and it transformed a vaguely menacing antagonist on the other side of the planet into a terrifying, palpable, existential threat. And yet, the attack on Pearl Harbor seemed quite predictable after the fact.

Many signals suggested an attack on Pearl Harbor was possible, and perhaps imminent. Diplomatic relations between the United States and Japan were in a state of rapid deterioration in November and December 1941. The Japanese desire for territorial expansion made the U.S. Pacific Fleet, which Roosevelt had moved to Pearl Harbor from San Diego precisely to deter such ambitions,2 a natural flashpoint. Meanwhile, Japan's navy was repeatedly changing its call signs, an indication that its intentions were becoming more hostile, and there was increasing movement of Japanese troops and warships off the coasts of China and Southeast Asia.3

The most ominous signal of all was the silence. American intelligence officials had ingeniously succeeded in breaking PURPLE, the code that Japan used to encrypt its diplomatic messages, allowing us to decipher perhaps 97 percent of them.4 Our attempts to decode Japanese military transmissions were less successful. But even if we could not understand the messages, we heard them and could trace their location. The steady stream of click-clacks from Japan's fleet of aircraft carriers ordinarily betrayed their whereabouts when they were out to sea.

From mid-November onward, however, there had been total radio silence; we had no idea where the carriers were. There were no global satellites in the 1940s, and only the primitive makings of radar. Air patrol reconnaissance missions were cost-prohibitive in the vast reaches of the Pacific and were carried out erratically at a distance of only three hundred or four hundred miles from the base.5 The radio transmissions were our best means of detection, and without them an entire fleet of these ships, each of them the size of six football fields, had disappeared.

Many in the intelligence community concluded that the carriers were close to their home waters where they could rely on alternate means of communication.6 The second possibility was that the fleet had ventured far into the Pacific, away from American naval installations.7

The Japanese carrier fleet, in fact, was en route to Hawaii. It had charted a precise course; like a quarterback perceiving the holes in his opponent's coverage, the fleet was maneuvering through the blind spots in our defenses. The ships initially traveled in a long, straight line toward the east-southeast, almost exactly bisecting our naval stations at the Midway Islands and in Dutch Harbor, Alaska. Then on December 4, after reaching longitude 165 west, they abruptly turned at a 45 degree angle toward Hawaii, where three days later they would launch the morning attack that killed almost 2,400 soldiers and sank four of the Navy's battleships.

The United States Congress declared war on Japan and its entry into World War II by a vote of 470 to 1 the next day.8

Signals, Signifying Nothing

When American Airlines Flight 77 collided with the limestone face of the Pentagon on September 11, 2001, killing fifty-nine innocent passengers and 125 of his colleagues, Donald Rumsfeld thought about Pearl Harbor.9 He was eight years old on December 7, 1941, and was listening to his beloved Chicago Bears on the radio when the broadcast was interrupted by a bulletin with news of the surprise attack.10

I met Rumsfeld at his office in Washington in March 2012, having been warned that interviews with him could be hit or miss. Rumsfeld, at five-foot-seven and almost eighty years old, is not tremendously physically imposing, but he is intimidating in almost every other way. Born in Evanston, Illinois, he attended public high school and received an academic scholarship to Princeton, where he starred on the wrestling team and wrote his thesis on presidential powers before going off to serve in the Navy and then in Congress. His office walls are adorned with plaques and memorabilia from the four administrations he has served; he is the only person in American history to have had two separate stints as secretary of defense, first under President Ford from 1975 to 1977 and then, fully a quarter century later, under George W. Bush.

But Rumsfeld was in a good mood, having scrutinized the detailed outline for this book that I had given to his young and able chief of staff, Keith Urbahn.11 I knew of Rumsfeld's interest in Pearl Harbor. He greeted me with a photocopy of the foreword to a remarkable book, Roberta Wohlstetter's 1962 Pearl Harbor: Warning and Decision, which outlined the myriad reasons why the Japanese attack had been such a surprise to our military and intelligence officers. Worse than being unprepared, we had mistaken our ignorance for knowledge and made ourselves more vulnerable as a result.

"In Pearl Harbor, what they prepared for were things that really didn't happen," Rumsfeld said. "They prepared for sabotage because they had so many Japanese descendants living in Hawaii. And so they stuck all the airplanes close together, so they could be protected. So of course the bombers came and they were enormously vulnerable, and they were destroyed."

In advance of Pearl Harbor, as Rumsfeld mentioned, we had a theory that sabotage—attack from within—was the most likely means by which our planes and ships would be attacked. The concern over sabotage was pervasive in Hawaii.12 It was thought that the 80,000 Japanese nationals there might attack not just military bases but radio stations, pineapple farms, and dairy mills with little warning.* Any signals were interpreted in this context, logically or not, and we prepared for subterfuge.13 We stacked our planes wingtip to wingtip, and our ships stern to bow, on the theory that it would be easier to monitor one big target than several smaller ones.

Meanwhile we theorized that, if Japan seemed to be mobilizing for an attack, it would be against Russia or perhaps against the Asian territorial possessions of the United Kingdom, Russia and the UK being countries that were already involved in the war. Why would the Japanese want to provoke the sleeping giant of the United States? We did not see that Japan believed our involvement in the war was inevitable,14 and they wanted to strike us when we were least prepared and they could cause the most damage to our Navy. The imperial Japanese government of the time was not willing to abandon its hopes for territorial expansion. We had not seen the conflict through the enemy's eyes.

To Wohlstetter, a signal is a piece of evidence that tells us something useful about our enemy's intentions;15 this book thinks of a signal as an indication of the underlying truth behind a statistical or predictive problem.* Wohlstetter's definition of noise is subtly different too. Whereas I tend to use noise to mean random patterns that might easily be mistaken for signals, Wohlstetter uses it to mean the sound produced by competing signals.16 In the field of intelligence analysis, the absence of signals can signify something important (the absence of radio transmissions from Japan's carrier fleet signaled their move toward Hawaii) and the presence of too many signals can make it exceptionally challenging to discern meaning. They may drown one another out in an ear-splitting cacophony.

The next set of diagrams consist of a series of ten signals, each governed by an extremely simple and orderly mathematical function known as a sine wave. In figure 13-2a, one of these signals is highlighted and is much more distinct than the others. After the fact of an attack or some other failure of prediction, this is how the world may look to us. We will see the signal: the paper trail, the pattern, the precursors. Following both Pearl Harbor and September 11, a significant minority of Americans asserted that the patterns were so clear that the government must have known about the attack, and therefore must have been complicit in planning or executing it.*

FIGURE 13-2A: COMPETING SIGNALS WITH ONE SIGNAL HIGHLIGHTED

FIGURE 13-2B: COMPETING SIGNALS, UNDIFFERENTIATED

But this is not usually how the patterns look to us in advance. Instead, they are more like figure 13-2b, an ugly mess of tangled spaghetti string. As Wohlstetter writes:17

It is much easier after the event to sort the relevant from the irrelevant signals. After the event, of course, a signal is always crystal clear; we can now see what disaster it was signaling, since the disaster has occurred. But before the event it is obscure and pregnant with conflicting meanings. It comes to the observer embedded in an atmosphere of "noise," i.e., in the company of all sorts of information that is useless and irrelevant for predicting the particular disaster.

In cases like these, what matters is not our signal detection capabilities: provided that we have met some basic threshold of competence, we will have perceived plenty of signals before something on the scale of Pearl Harbor or September 11. The relevant signals will be somewhere in a file cabinet or a computer database. But so will a whole host of irrelevant ones. We need signal analysis capabilities to isolate the pertinent signals from the echo chamber.

Usually, we will have some views on which signals are more important and require our focus. It is good and necessary to have these views, up to a point. I've detailed the problems that ensue when we consider data without context. Rather than make useful predictions, we trip out on the patterns and get nowhere fast.

However, the context we provide can be biased and self-serving. As Cicero warned Shakespeare's Julius Caesar,18 "Men may construe things, after their fashion / Clean from the purpose of the things themselves." We may focus on those signals which advance our preferred theory about the world, or might imply a more optimistic outcome. Or we may simply focus on the ones that fit with bureaucratic protocol, like the doctrine that sabotage rather than an air attack was the more likely threat to Pearl Harbor.

The Unfamiliar and the Improbable

Rumsfeld's favorite part of Wohlstetter's book is the foreword, composed by the Nobel Prize–winning economist Thomas Schelling, who was instrumental in translating John Nash's early work on game theory into national-security contexts. Schelling writes of our propensity to mistake the unfamiliar for the improbable:

There is a tendency in our planning to confuse the unfamiliar with the improbable. The contingency we have not considered seriously looks strange; what looks strange is thought improbable; what is improbable need not be considered seriously.

Because of the United States' isolation from the European and Asian continents and the relatively good relations we have maintained with the rest of the Americas since the promulgation of the Monroe Doctrine, we have infrequently been the subject of foreign attack. The exceptions (September 11) and near-misses (the Cuban Missile Crisis) have therefore been exceptionally jarring to us. Before Pearl Harbor, the last foreign attack on American soil had been during the War of 1812.19 Americans just do not live among the ruins of wars past, as people in Europe and Asia have throughout their history.

But our Hawaiian territory* sat in the middle of the Pacific Ocean: Honolulu is closer to Tokyo (3,860 miles) than to Washington, DC (4,825 miles). Because of its geographic position and the presence of our naval fleet, it made an obvious target to the Japanese. The unfamiliarity of attacks on American territory may have made us complacent about the threat.

Perhaps we went through a logical deduction something along these lines:

The United States is rarely attacked

Hawaii is a part of the United States

Therefore, Hawaii is unlikely to be attacked

This is deeply flawed thinking. As I described in chapter 1, our predictions often fail when we venture "out of sample." The fact that the United States had rarely been attacked is an empirical observation, not an iron law. That Nebraska, say, had never been attacked by a foreign power gave no real evidentiary weight to the situation in Hawaii, given the latter's outlying geographic position in the Pacific and the precariousness of the war situation there.

But at least this flawed type of thinking would have involved some thinking. If we had gone through the thought process, perhaps we could have recognized how loose our assumptions were. Schelling suggests that our problems instead run deeper. When a possibility is unfamiliar to us, we do not even think about it. Instead we develop a sort of mind-blindness to it. In medicine this is called anosognosia:20 part of the physiology of the condition prevents a patient from recognizing that they have the condition. Some Alzheimer's patients present in this way.

The predictive version of this syndrome requires us to do one of the things that goes most against our nature: admit to what we do not know.

Was 9/11 a Known Unknown?

[T]here are known knowns; there are things we know we know. We also know there are known unknowns; that is to say we know there are some things we do not know. But there are also unknown unknowns—there are things we do not know we don't know.—Donald Rumsfeld21

Rumsfeld's famous line about "unknown unknowns," delivered in a 2002 press conference in response to a reporter's question about the presence of weapons of mass destruction in Iraq, is a corollary to Schelling's concern about mistaking the unfamiliar for the unlikely. If we ask ourselves a question and can come up with an exact answer, that is a known known. If we ask ourselves a question and can't come up with a very precise answer, that is a known unknown. An unknown unknown is when we haven't really thought to ask the question in the first place. "They are gaps in our knowledge, but gaps that we don't know exist," Rumsfeld writes in his 2011 memoir.22

The concept of the unknown unknown is sometimes misunderstood. It's common to see the term employed in formulations like this, to refer to a fairly specific (but hard-to-predict) threat:

Nigeria is a good bet for a crisis in the not-too-distant future—an unknown unknown that poses the most profound implications for US and global security [emphasis added].23

This particular prophecy about the terrorist threat posed by Nigeria was rather prescient (it was written in 2006, three years before the Nigerian national Umar Farouk Abdulmutallab tried to detonate explosives hidden in his underwear while aboard a flight from Amsterdam to Detroit). However, it got the semantics wrong. Anytime you are able to enumerate a dangerous or unpredictable element, you are expressing a known unknown. To articulate what you don't know is a mark of progress.

Few things, as we have found, fall squarely into the binary categories of the predictable and the unpredictable. Even if you don't know to predict something with 100 percent certainty, you may be able to come up with an estimate or a forecast of the threat. It may be a sharp estimate or a crude one, an accurate forecast or an inaccurate one, a smart one or a dumb one.* But at least you are alert to the problem and you can usually get somewhere: we don't know exactly how much of a terrorist threat Nigeria may pose to us, for instance, but it is probably a bigger threat than Luxembourg.

The problem comes when, out of frustration that our knowledge of the world is imperfect, we fail to make a forecast at all. An unknown unknown is a contingency that we have not even considered. We have some kind of mental block against it, or our experience is inadequate to imagine it; it's as though it doesn't even exist.

This poses especially grave risks when we consider the signals we receive from terrorists. As before Pearl Harbor, there were many signals that pointed toward the September 11 attacks:

There had been at least a dozen warnings24 about the potential for aircraft to be used as weapons, including a 1994 threat by Algerian terrorists to crash a hijacked jet into the Eiffel Tower, and a 1998 plot by a group linked to Al Qaeda to crash an explosives-laden airplane into the World Trade Center.

The World Trade Center had been targeted by terrorists before. The 1993 bombings by Ramzi Yousef and his co-conspirators, who had trained at Al Qaeda camps in Afghanistan, had killed six and were intended to bring the Twin Towers down.25

Al Qaeda was known to be an exceptionally dangerous and inventive terrorist organization. It had a propensity for pulling off large-scale attacks, including the bombing of U.S. embassies in Kenya and Tanzania in 1998, which killed 224, and the bombing of the USS Cole in Yemen in 2000.26

Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice had been warned in July 2001 about heightened Al Qaeda activity—and that the group was shifting its focus from foreign targets to the United States itself.27 "It's my sixth sense," CIA chief George Tenet had said after seeing the intelligence. "But I feel it coming. This is going to be the big one."28

An Islamic fundamentalist named Zacarias Moussaoui had been arrested on August 16, 2001, less than a month before the attacks, after an instructor at a flight training school in Minnesota reported he was behaving suspiciously.29 Moussaoui, despite having barely more than 50 hours of training and having never flown solo, had sought training in a Boeing 747 simulator, an unusual request for someone who was nowhere near obtaining his pilot's license.30

It is much easier to identify the importance of these signals after the fact; our national security agencies have to sort through literally tens of thousands or even hundreds of thousands of potential warnings31 to find useful nuggets of information. Most of them amount to nothing.

Still, the September 11 plot was exceptionally ambitious—and the terrorists were able to execute it with relatively few hitches. Nineteen terrorists had entered the air-transit system, successfully hijacking four planes. Three of the four planes hit their targets; United 93 failed to do so only because of the exceptional bravery of the passengers on board, who charged the cockpit after they learned what had happened to the other flights.* Not only had we failed to detect the plot, but it doesn't appear that we came all that close to doing so.

The 9/11 Commission Report identified four types of systemic failures that contributed to our inability to appreciate the importance of these signals, including failures of policy, capabilities, and management.32 The most important category was failures of imagination.33 The signals just weren't consistent with our familiar hypotheses about how terrorists behaved, and they went in one ear and out the other without our really registering them.

The North American Aerospace Defense Command (NORAD) had actually proposed running a war game in which a hijacked airliner crashed into the Pentagon. But the idea was dismissed as being "too unrealistic."34 And in the unlikely event that such an attack were to occur, it was assumed, the plane would come from overseas and not from one of our domestic airports. (Ironically, this was the exact opposite of the mistake that we'd made before Pearl Harbor, where the possibility of an attack from abroad was dismissed because planners were concerned about sabotage.)

The possibility of a suicide attack may also have been hard to imagine. FAA policy was predicated on the idea that a hijacking would result in a tense standoff and perhaps a detour to some exotic airport in the Middle East. But it was assumed the terrorist would not want to destroy the plane, or to kill passengers other than as a negotiation tactic. Thus, cockpit doors were not tightly sealed and were often left entirely unlocked in practice.35

Yet suicide attacks had a rich history36—including, of course, the Japanese kamikaze pilots in World War II.37 Moreover, suicide attacks had become much more common in the years immediately preceding September 11; one database of terrorist incidents38 documented thirty-nine of them in 2000 alone, including the bombing of the USS Cole in Yemen, up from thirty-one in the 1980s.

However, World War II was a distant memory, and most of the suicide attacks had occurred in the Middle East or in Third World countries. The mental shortcut that Daniel Kahneman calls the availability heuristic39—we tend to overrate the likelihood of events that are nearer to us in time and space and underpredict the ones that aren't—may have clouded our judgment.

"You can reasonably predict behavior if people would prefer not to die," Rumsfeld told me. "But if people are just as happy dying, or feel that it's a privilege or that it achieves their goal, then they're going to behave in a very different way."

The Scale of September 11

The September 11 plot, then, was less a hypothesis that we evaluated and rejected as being unlikely—and more one that we had failed to really consider in the first place. It was too unfamiliar to us. Rumsfeld suggested in his memoir that September 11 was an unknown unknown.40

"The CIA would tell you that it was not a thought that was completely foreign to them," he told me. "But a lot of it came after the attack, in retrospect."

"I mean, it's fair to say Al Qaeda was a known unknown," added Urbahn, Rumsfeld's chief of staff. "But one of the things [Tenet] talks about in his book is that the scale was far different than any other attack. The fact that it was—so big."

Indeed, the sheer magnitude of the September 11 attack—2,977 innocent people killed—most differentiated it from our previous experience with terrorism. Even those who were the most concerned about what Al Qaeda was planning, like Tenet and Richard Clarke, the chairman of counterterrorism at the National Security Council, had trouble conceiving of its scale. The notes that Clarke had sent to Condoleezza Rice, for instance, implored her to imagine what might happen if hundreds of Americans died41—not thousands of Americans, as actually occurred.

Prior to September 11, the largest terror attack in a Western country* had been only about one-tenth as fatal, when in 1985 a Sikh extremist group hid a bomb in an Air India flight bound for Delhi from Montreal, killing 329 passengers. The destruction of Oklahoma City's Alfred P. Murrah federal building by the militant Timothy McVeigh in 1995, which killed 168, had been the largest attack on American soil.

But September 11 was not an outlier. Although the particulars of the events that day were not discerned in advance—and although they may have been very hard to predict—we had some reason to think that an attack on the scale of September 11 was possible.

The Mathematics of Terrorism: Why 9/11 Wasn't an Outlier

It might seem uncomfortable to think about terrorism in an abstract and mathematical fashion, as we are about to do here. To be clear, this is not a substitute for the sort of signal analysis that the intelligence community performs. But this type of thinking can help patch some of our blind spots and give us better estimates of the overall hazard that terrorism poses. We can better appreciate future risk if we analyze the existing data.

In 2008, I was invited to speak at a conference hosted by the Center for Strategic and International Studies (CSIS), a Washington-based foreign policy think tank. The timing couldn't have been much worse—it was just two weeks before the 2008 elections—but I was told that the panel involved national security and I suppose I felt it was my duty to attend.

The conference gathered experts from different domains in the hope that a group brainstorming session might stumble across one or two "outside-the-box" insights about how to predict and prevent terror attacks. There was a marketing executive from Coca-Cola on the panel, a police detective from New York, a man who created algorithms for the dating Web site eHarmony—and me. (There were also a number of experts whose work was more self-evidently related to terrorism: people who worked for the State Department, or the military, or for defense contractors around Washington, DC.)

I gave a short presentation describing my work predicting outcomes in baseball and in politics; it was received politely enough. But then it was time for the question-and-answer session. "That's all very nice, Nate," I was told. "But how in the hell is this applicable to terrorism?" (I'm paraphrasing, but only slightly.)

Frankly, the methods I presented at the conference probably weren't all that useful for national security analysis. Baseball and politics are data-rich fields that yield satisfying answers. Thousands of baseball games are played every year. Elections occur less frequently—and require somewhat more caution to forecast—but there are hundreds of polls released during every presidential campaign. All this data is publicly available, freely or cheaply.

Terrorism, seemingly, is not this way at all. The events that we are really concerned about, like September 11, occur only rarely. Moreover, terrorist groups try to conceal their intentions—Al Qaeda was known to be especially effective at this. Within the realm of terrorism, just as was the case immediately before Pearl Harbor, the absence of signals is sometimes more worrisome than the presence of them. If the CIA is able to hack into an Internet chat site thought to be used by radical groups, there may be quite a bit of loose and casual chatter at first, when organizations like Al Qaeda are simply hoping to find new and naïve recruits. But when an attack is being plotted, and the stakes are raised, the conversation usually goes offline.

At a microscopic level, then—at the level of individual terrorists, or individual terror schemes—there are unlikely to be any magic-bullet solutions to predicting attacks. Instead, intelligence requires sorting through the spaghetti strands of signals that I spoke about earlier. One expert I talked to at the CSIS conference provided another metaphor: detecting a terror plot is much more difficult than finding a needle in a haystack, he said, and more analogous to finding one particular needle in a pile full of needle parts.

Some problems that are highly unpredictable on a case-by-case basis may seem more orderly if we zoom out and take a macroscopic view. Outside insight into the mathematical properties of terrorism has proved more useful here.

Aaron Clauset, a professor at the University of Colorado with a background in physics and computer science, has published papers on the mathematics of everything from the evolution of whales42 to the network dynamics of multiplayer role-playing games.43 The intelligence community has a long-standing reputation for preferring alpha-male types. The thirty-something Clauset, whose catholic research interests might seem geeky to it, has met a mixture of encouragement and resistance when presenting his findings.

"Some people say it's a breath of fresh air," Clauset told me when we caught up on the phone. "That's a few people. Most people look at it and say, ‘That's kind of weird. You want to use math?'"

Clauset's insight, however, is actually quite simple—or at least it seems that way with the benefit of hindsight. What his work found is that the mathematics of terrorism resemble those of another domain discussed in this book: earthquakes.

Imagine that you live in a seismically active area like California. Over a period of a couple of decades, you experience magnitude 4 earthquakes on a regular basis, magnitude 5 earthquakes perhaps a few times a year, and a handful of magnitude 6s. If you have a house that can withstand a magnitude 6 earthquake but not a magnitude 7, would it be right to conclude that you have nothing to worry about?

Of course not. According to the power-law distribution that these earthquakes obey, those magnitude 5s and magnitude 6s would have been a sign that larger earthquakes were possible—inevitable, in fact, given enough time. The big one is coming, eventually. You ought to have been prepared.

Terror attacks behave in something of the same way. The Lockerbie bombing and Oklahoma City were the equivalent of magnitude 7 earthquakes. While destructive enough on their own, they also implied the potential for something much worse—something like the September 11 attacks, which might be thought of as a magnitude 8. It was not an outlier but instead part of the broader mathematical pattern.

Defining and Measuring Terrorism

To look at the statistics of terrorism, we first need to define exactly what it is. This can get a little tricky. Vladimir Lenin said that "the purpose of terrorism is to terrorize."44 This is more insightful than it might seem: terrorists are not purely seeking to maximize their body count; instead, they want to maximize the amount of fear they inflict on a population so as to alter its behavior in some way. Death and destruction are just a means toward that end. "You may kill people to achieve that," Rumsfeld told me. "But that is not its purpose."

Still, there is a wide variety of violent behavior throughout the world, and so academics have sought a somewhat more precise definition to distinguish terrorism from its counterparts. One definition, employed by a widely used database of terrorist incidents,45 requires that terrorist acts must be intentional, that they must entail actual or threatened violence, and that they must be carried out by "subnational actors" (meaning, not directly by sovereign governments themselves). The incidents, moreover, must be aimed at attaining a political, economic, social, or religious goal. And they must involve some element of intimidation or coercion—intended to induce fear in an audience beyond the immediate victims.

The type of terrorism that most explicitly meets these criteria and which is most familiar to us today has relatively modern roots. The UCLA political scientist David C. Rapoport dates it to 197946—the year of the Iranian Revolution. He relates it to religious extremism, particularly among Islamist groups. This wave of terrorism is associated with a sharp rise in the number of attacks against Western countries and Western interests; from 1979 through 2000 the number of terror attacks against NATO countries rose almost threefold.

Most of the incidents, however, produced few fatalities, if any. From the Iranian Revolution through September 10, 2001, there were more than 4,000 attempted or successful terror attacks in NATO countries. But more than half the death toll had been caused by just seven of them. The three largest attacks—the Air India disaster, the Lockerbie bombing, and Oklahoma City—had accounted for more than 40 percent of the fatalities all by themselves.

This type of pattern—a very small number of cases causing a very large proportion of the total impact—is characteristic of a power-law distribution, the type of distribution that earthquakes obey. Clauset's insight was that terror attacks abide by a power-law distribution as well.

Suppose that we draw a graph (figure 13-4) plotting the frequency of terror attacks on one axis and their death tolls on the other. At first, this doesn't seem terribly useful. You can clearly see the power-law relationship: the number of attacks decreases very steeply with their frequency. But the slope is so steep that it seems to obscure any meaningful signal: you see a large number of very small attacks, and a small number of very large ones, with seemingly little room in between. The September 11 attacks look like an outlier.

However, as was the case for earthquakes, the data is easier to comprehend when we plot it on a logarithmic scale (more specifically, as in figure 13-5, a double-logarithmic scale in which both the vertical and the horizontal axes are logarithmic). It's important to emphasize that I've done nothing to this data other than make it easier to visualize—it's still the same underlying information. But what had once seemed chaotic and random is now revealed to be rather orderly. When plotted on a double-logarithmic scale, the relationship between the frequency and the severity of terror attacks appears to be, more or less,47 a straight line. This is, in fact, a fundamental characteristic of power-law relationships: when you plot them on a double-logarithmic scale, the pattern that emerges is as straight as an arrow.

Power laws have some important properties when it comes to making predictions about the scale of future risks. In particular, they imply that disasters much worse than what society has experienced in the recent past are entirely possible, if infrequent. For instance, the terrorism power law predicts that a NATO country (not necessarily the United States) would experience a terror attack killing at least one hundred people about six times over the thirty-one-year period from 1979 through 2009. (This is close to the actual figure: there were actually seven such attacks during this period.) Likewise, it implies that an attack that killed 1,000 people would occur about once every twenty-two years. And it suggests that something on the scale of September 11,48 which killed almost 3,000 people, would occur about once every forty years.

It's not that much of an accomplishment, however, to describe history in statistical terms. Sure, it's possible for a statistical model to accommodate an event like September 11 now that one has actually occurred. But what would Clauset's method have said about the possibility of such an attack before it happened?

September 11 certainly did shift the probabilities somewhat—just as the number of very large earthquakes in recent years implies that they are somewhat more common than we might have thought previously.49 Nevertheless, even before it occurred, the power-law method would have concluded that an attack on the scale of September 11 was a clear possibility. If the power-law process is applied to data collected entirely before 9/11—everything from the beginning of the modern wave of terrorism in 1979 through September 10, 2001—it implies that a September 11–scale attack would occur about once every eighty years in a NATO country, or roughly once in our lifetimes.50

This method does not tell us anything specific about exactly where and when the attack would occur. It is a long-term tendency, like the tendency toward earthquakes in California. And terror attacks, unlike earthquakes, can plausibly be prevented—this is an important qualification to Clauset's hypothesis.

What this data does suggest is that an attack on the scale of September 11 should not have been unimaginable. The power-law distribution demonstrates that events of a much larger scale than occurred in the past may plausibly occur in the future. Our lack of familiarity with them will be an especially poor guide to their likelihood.

Magnitude 9 Terrorism

But if the September 11 attacks were tantamount to a magnitude 8 earthquake, what about the potential for something larger still: the equivalent of a magnitude 9? Clauset's method gives us reason to believe that attacks that might kill tens of thousands or hundreds of thousands of people are a possibility to contemplate as well. The mechanism for such an attack is unpleasant but easy enough to identify. It would most likely involve weapons of mass destruction, particularly nuclear weapons.

The world, fortunately, hasn't had much experience with nuclear warfare. The atomic bombs dropped on Hiroshima and Nagasaki, Japan, in 1945 at the end of World War II killed about 200,000 people.51 One estimate52 holds that an equally powerful weapon, detonated at one of New York City's major ports, would kill on the order of 250,000 civilians. But nuclear technology has evolved since then. A larger and more modern weapon, blown up over midtown Manhattan, could kill as many as one million New Yorkers53 while incinerating hundreds of billions of dollars in real estate. Simultaneous attacks on New York, Washington, Chicago, and Los Angeles could kill on the order of four million Americans, in line with a stated goal of Osama bin Laden.54

These estimates reflect—probably—worst-case scenarios. Because such an attack could be hundreds of times worse than 9/11, however, the question of its likelihood has been the subject of intense debate in the national security community.

One of the more pessimistic assessments comes from Graham Allison, a professor of political science at Harvard. Allison served in the administrations of both President Reagan and President Clinton, and his books and papers on the Cuban missile crisis have been cited thousands of times by other scholars.55 So when Allison has something to say, his peers listen.

Allison came to a frightening conclusion in 2004: "A nuclear terrorist attack on America in the decade ahead is more likely than not,"56 he wrote. Allison qualified his forecast by saying it assumed we remained "on the current path"—a world in which there are dangerous terrorist groups, vulnerable nuclear materials at many places around the world, and a lack of focus on the problem from U.S. policy makers.

We are more than a decade removed from the September 11 attacks. But when I spoke with Allison in 2010, he reaffirmed the gravity of threat he perceives. It's one that he takes quite literally, in fact. I called Allison from my desk at the New York Times office, a block from Times Square.57 Allison told me that he'd be at least a little bit nervous in Times Square and wasn't sure if he'd be willing to work there every day.

Allison's probability estimate doesn't come from a statistical model. Instead it's "the basis on which [he]'d make bets."* Why does he see so much risk? "It's a knockoff of the old Sherlock Holmes version of motive, means, and opportunity," he told me.

The motive of terrorists, for Allison, is easy to discern. Osama bin Laden had said that he wanted to kill four million Americans, a number that could probably be achieved only through a nuclear attack. The modus operandi of Al Qaeda has been what Allison calls "spectaculars"—occasional but astonishing attacks that kill large numbers of innocent people. And the CIA had picked up Al Qaeda chatter about an "American Hiroshima" before the September 11 attacks.58

By opportunity, Allison means the ability of terrorist groups to smuggle a weapon into the United States. He has little doubt that this could happen. "How do crooks get into American cities every day?" Allison asked me. The United States has more than 3,700 ports, and receives more than six million cargo containers per year—but only 2 percent of them are physically inspected by customs agents.59 "If you have any doubt, they could always hide it in a bale of marijuana," Allison half-joked.

So Allison is mostly focused on the means—the ability of a terrorist group to acquire a nuclear weapon. If we want to reduce the risk of a nuclear version of 9/11, controlling the means would be the way.

Experts believe there are about 20,000 nuclear warheads in the world today60—down from a peak of 65,000 in the 1980s. A threat could theoretically come from any of the nine countries that possess nuclear weapons today—even the United States has lost track of eleven of its nuclear weapons throughout its history61—and other countries may be trying to develop them. But Allison's concern stems primarily from two nuclear states: Russia and Pakistan.

In Allison's view, the risk has lessened some in the former country. In part because of successful programs like the one sponsored by senators Sam Nunn and Richard Lugar, there are no longer active nuclear weapons in the outlying states of the former Soviet Union. And in Russia itself, the number of nuclear weapons has declined to 11,000 today from a peak of 30,000 in 1985.

If the risk in Russia has been reduced, however, the threat posed by Pakistan has increased—perhaps markedly. "If you map weapons of mass destruction and terrorism, all the roads intersect in Pakistan," Allison told me.

Although Pakistan is ostensibly an ally of the United States, even the most generous interpretation would suggest that it represents a problem as well as a solution in the effort to contain terrorism. The country had initially been reluctant to cooperate with the United States after the September 11 attacks, and Pakistan's president later claimed that the U.S. had resorted to a threat to bomb it "back to the stone age" before it complied.62 Osama bin Laden had been living in Abbottabad, Pakistan, for as many as six years63 before he was killed. Meanwhile, Pakistan has roughly one hundred nuclear weapons and is building additional nuclear facilities and delivery systems at a rapid pace.64 The country now ranks seventh in the world in the Economist's Political Instability Index, up significantly from the recent past,65 meaning that the risk of a coup d'état or a revolution is quite high. A new regime could be openly hostile to the United States. All the conditions that a terrorist might need to acquire a nuclear weapon could then be in place.

Because of the deteriorating situation in Pakistan, as well as the residual threat posed by other countries, Allison told me that he was still pretty much where he was in 2004—he envisions a better-than-even chance of a nuclear attack on the United States within the next decade unless there is a change in trajectory.

Allison also has his critics, including Michael Levi, whom I visited at his office at the Council on Foreign Relations in New York. Like Aaron Clauset, Levi has an eccentric background: he studied theoretical physics at Princeton and was a technical consultant to the popular television program 24, which depicted a terrorist group attempting to detonate a nuclear weapon in Los Angeles.*

Levi thinks there is some risk of an attack. "When I first came here," he told me, "one of the first things I did was to draw the rings around Grand Central Station to see how a ten kiloton bomb would affect my apartment." But he thinks Allison's estimate is much too high, and questions several of his premises.

For one thing, Levi thinks that Allison takes the motive of terrorist groups too much for granted. It's not that Al Qaeda wouldn't have the aspiration to blow up Manhattan, he says. But groups and individuals have all sorts of aspirations that they make no effort to act on because they doubt their ability to achieve them. Terrorist groups, in Levi's view, place a high premium on the likelihood of their plots' succeeding. A failed attempt would blow the group's cover and invite unwanted attention from the United States and other governments. A failed attack could also harm the group's credibility with both existing members and potential new recruits. Terrorist organizations are fundamentally weak and unstable: as is supposedly true of new restaurants, 90 percent of them fail within the first year.66 Their recruitment message relies, in large part, on convincing their members that they are able to deliver redemption from perceived injustices.67 Al Qaeda, in particular, had a very high success rate on the attacks it attempted up to and including September 11, something that may help to explain its uncommon longevity. But if a terrorist group's ability to achieve that redemption is called into question, their recruits might go elsewhere.

A nuclear attack would be hard to pull off. It is not that terrorist groups are inherently averse to intricate planning—the September 11 attacks were in the works for five years. But the more complicated the plot, the more cooperation is required from a larger number of participants, each of whom carries the risk of defecting from the group or being detected by counterterrorism authorities. A nuclear attack would also require significant and highly specialized technical knowledge—far more than four terrorists learning how to fly a 767. The pool of nuclear physicists is small to begin with, and the number who could be trusted to maintain loyalty to a terrorist group is smaller still.68 "If they found a guy who had an engineering degree from a university and put him in charge of the nuclear team," Levi told me, "I wouldn't expect much to come of that."

Finally, terrorists' goals are not necessarily to kill as many people as possible. Rather, it's to inflict fear and alter behavior. A nuclear attack would be incredibly terrifying, but it would not necessarily be one hundred or one thousand times more terrifying than September 11, even though it might kill that many more people. If the chance of success was low, it might not be the most effective means for terrorists to achieve their goals.

Others in the national security community, like Rumsfeld, are more concerned about a biological attack. A biological attack would require much less expertise than a nuclear one, but it might instill just as much fear. Moreover, it is a type of fear that might be less familiar to us. Particularly if the biological agent were contagious, like a reintroduction of the smallpox virus, it could remain an active concern for weeks or months, with schools and shopping malls shuttered, hospitals quarantined, and state borders closed. The remarkable resiliency that New York displayed just days after September 11 would be harder to achieve.

"Biological is different. It is also something that we're not comfortable with. People know how god-awful nuclear weapons are," Rumsfeld said. "Something that is contagious, and something that can go down through generations and can alter genes—the fear of a biological weapon is quite different than the fear of a nuclear weapon or even a chemical weapon."

The death toll that a biological attack might cause is hard to estimate—just as the spread of any transmissible disease is hard to predict until it occurs (as we found in chapter 7). Still, the worst-case scenarios are undoubtedly quite bad. A 2001 simulation called Dark Winter,69 imagined that three million Americans might become infected with smallpox, and one million might die, if terrorists succeeded in spreading it with simultaneous hits on shopping malls in Oklahoma City, Philadelphia, and Atlanta.

Thinking Big About Terrorism

Clauset's method is agnostic on the means by which a magnitude 9 terrorist attack might occur—it just says that one is possible. Judging by the death tolls of attacks from 1979 through 2009, for instance, a power-law model like Clauset's could be taken to imply there is about a 10 percent chance of an attack that would kill at least 10,000 people in a NATO country over the next decade. There is a 3 percent chance of an attack that would kill 100,000, and a 0.6 percent chance of one that would kill one million or more.

These estimates need to be approached cautiously. There is still considerable uncertainty, especially about the potential for extremely large-scale events, and slightly different versions of this technique produce slightly different answers. However, there is one more instructive comparison to be made between terrorism and earthquakes.

The Gutenberg–Richter law dictates that, over the long term, the frequency of earthquakes is reduced about ten times for every one-point increase in magnitude. However, the energy released by earthquakes increases exponentially as a function of magnitude. In particular, for every one-point increase in magnitude, an earthquake's energy release increases by about thirty-two times. So a magnitude 6 earthquake releases around thirty-two times as much seismic energy as a magnitude 5, while a magnitude 7 is close to 1,000 times more powerful.

The force released by earthquakes scales up at a faster rate than their frequency decreases. If there are ten magnitude 6 earthquakes for every magnitude 7, the magnitude 7 tremor will account for considerably more damage70 than all the magnitude 6s combined. Indeed, a mere handful of earthquakes are responsible for a very large fraction of their total seismic energy. In the one hundred years between 1906 and 2005, for instance, just three large earthquakes—the Chilean earthquake of 1960, the Alaskan earthquake of 1964, and the Great Sumatra Earthquake of 2004—accounted for almost half the total energy release of all earthquakes in the world over the entire century. So, seismologists and contingency planners are mostly concerned about very large earthquakes. A more modest earthquake in the wrong place at the wrong time can cause enormous damage (like the magnitude 7.0 earthquake in Haiti in 2010), but it's mostly the very high magnitude earthquakes that we have to worry about, even though they occur quite infrequently.

Consider again the case of terror attacks. The September 11 attacks alone killed more people—2,977, not counting the terrorists—than all other attacks in NATO countries over the thirty-year period between 1979 and 2009 combined (figure 13-7). A single nuclear or biological attack, meanwhile, might dwarf the fatality total of September 11.

So even if Levi is right that the odds of these attacks are extremely low, they represent the bulk of the hazard. The power-law method, for instance, estimates that the odds of an incident that would kill one million people—an atomic bomb detonated in Times Square—is only about 1 in 1,600 per year. But one million people dying once every 1,600 years represents 625 fatalities per year, considerably more than the roughly 180 people in NATO countries who have died on average in terror attacks since 1979. When it comes to terrorism, we need to think big, about the probability for very large magnitude events and how we might reduce it, even at the margin. Signals that point toward such large attacks should therefore receive a much higher strategic priority.

This mathematical argument for a focus on larger-scale threats cuts somewhat against the day-to-day imperatives of those who are actively involved in homeland security. In 1982, the social scientists James Q. Wilson and George L. Kelling introduced what they called the "broken windows" theory of crime deterrence.71 The idea was that by focusing on smaller-scale types of crime, like vandalism and misdemeanor drug offenses,72 police could contribute to an overall climate of lawfulness and therefore prevent bigger crime. The empirical evidence for the merit of this theory is quite mixed.73, 74

However, the theory was very warmly embraced by police departments from Los Angeles to New York because it lowered the degree of difficulty for police departments and provided for much more attainable goals. It's much easier to bust a sixteen-year-old kid for smoking a joint than to solve an auto theft or prevent a murder. Everybody likes to live in a cleaner, safer neighborhood. But it's unclear whether the broken-windows theory is more than window dressing.

Likewise, the ever more cumbersome requirements for commercial flights fall into the category of what the security expert Bruce Schneier calls "security theater"75—they are more for show than to actually deter terrorists. It's by no means completely irrational to be worried about airport security; airplanes have been the subject of a large number of terror attacks in the past, and terrorism can have a copycat element.76 Yet even accounting for crashes that had nothing to do with terrorism, only about one passenger for every twenty-five million was killed on an American commercial airliner during the decade of the 2000s.77 Even if you fly twenty times per year, you are about twice as likely to be struck by lightning.

Why Don't Terrorists Blow Up Shopping Malls?

Mostly, these efforts are aimed at foiling dumb terrorists—and there are surely a few of those, like the underwear bomber. A clever terrorist would probably be able to outwit these efforts, however, or he would redirect his attention to more vulnerable targets like buses or trains. Really, he would need to look no further than the check-in counter, where there are just as many people gathered but much less security. Terrorists have already figured this out: a suicide bomber killed thirty-five at the international arrivals area of Moscow's Domodedovo Airport in 2011.78

For that matter, a virtually unlimited number of unsecured targets exist that have nothing to do with the transportation system. Why don't terrorists go shoot up a shopping mall?

One reason there aren't all that many terror attacks may be that there aren't all that many terrorists. It is very difficult to get a head count of terrorists, but one commonly cited estimate is that Al Qaeda had only about 500 to 1,000 operatives at its peak.79 This figure includes hangers-on and wannabes, as well as the people engaged in all the nonviolent functions that groups like Al Qaeda must perform: some doofus has to reboot Al Qaeda's server when their network goes down. Kathleen Carley of Carnegie Mellon University, who studies the social networks of insurgent organizations, told me that even within what we think of as an extremist group, perhaps only 1 percent of members are true extremists. It's much easier to facilitate global jihad as Bin Laden's IT consultant than it is to walk into a crowded mall and blow yourself up.

Still, we should be careful when we ask these sorts of questions—we may, yet again, be confusing the unfamiliar for the improbable. The conundrum of why terrorists don't target shopping centers would seem ridiculous to someone in Israel, where it happens all the time.

The Israeli Approach to Terrorism Prevention

One of the obvious critiques of Clauset's power-law hypothesis is that, unlike in the case of something like earthquakes, terrorism can be stopped by human intervention.

Clauset's research suggests that the power-law distribution exists not in spite of the competition between terrorists and counterterrorism forces but perhaps because of it. The pattern of the points on the graph is dictated by the different counterterrorism strategies of the individual countries. There may be a sort of equilibrium that exists between terrorists and society, a balance that has been struck between freedom and security, although it may vary over time and place.80 We must always accept a certain amount of risk from terrorism when we want to live in a free society, whether or not we want to admit it.

"It will ebb and flow," Rumsfeld told me. "We are probably the most vulnerable to terrorism. We being free people. Because that is our nature. We expect to be able to get up and walk out the door and send our children to school and not have to look around the corner and see if we're going to be killed by something or blown up. To the extent we alter our behavior as free people dramatically, they've won."

Although Israel is targeted by terrorists much more frequently than the United States, Israelis do not live in fear of terrorism. A 2012 survey of Israeli Jews found that only 16 percent described terrorism as their greatest fear81—no more than the number who said they were worried about Israel's education system.

No Israeli politician would say outright that he tolerates small-scale terrorism, but that's essentially what the country does. It tolerates it because the alternative—having everyone be paralyzed by fear—is incapacitating and in line with the terrorists' goals. A key element in the country's strategy is making life as normal as possible for people after an attack occurs. For instance, police typically try to clear the scene of an attack within four hours of a bomb going off,82 letting everyone get back to work, errands, or even leisure. Small-scale terrorism is treated more like crime than an existential threat.

What Israel certainly does not tolerate is the potential for large-scale terrorism (as might be made more likely, for instance, by one of their neighbors acquiring weapons of mass destruction). There is some evidence that their approach is successful: Israel is the one country that has been able to bend Clauset's curve. If we plot the fatality tolls from terrorist incidents in Israel using the power-law method (figure 13-8), we find that there have been significantly fewer large-scale terror attacks than the power-law would predict; no incident since 1979 has killed more than two hundred people. The fact that Israel's power-law graph looks so distinct is evidence that our strategic choices do make some difference.

How to Read Terrorists' Signals

Whatever strategic choices we make, and whatever trade-off we are willing to accept between security and freedom, we must begin with the signal. Good intelligence is still our first line of defense against terror attacks.

One of the stated goals of the Iraq War was to prevent the further development of the country's weapons of mass destruction programs. Of course, there were virtually no WMDs there. Independent analyses of the decision to go into Iraq have generally concluded that the Bush White House did not pressure the intelligence community into coming up with faulty information—there was something of a consensus at the time in organizations like the CIA that Iraq was actively developing its WMD programs83—but it did misrepresent the intelligence to the American public in several important ways.84

Although this view has merit, I'm not sure that it's possible to make so crisp a distinction between what the Bush administration told the public, what they believed themselves, and what they learned from intelligence officials. In signal analysis, as with other types of prediction, it is very easy to see what you want in the mess of tangled data. The unreliable signals provided by sources like "Curveball"—an Iraqi national named Rafid Ahmed Alwan al-Janabi who later admitted85 to fabricating evidence about Iraq's bioweapons program in the hopes of sparking the Western powers to topple Saddam Hussein—could be read too credulously in an environment where we were too eager for war.

In chess, as we found in chapter 9, human beings tend to focus on just one or two potential moves at the expense of others that might be superior. Computers, which examine all the possibilities, are less prone to this mistake, and moves that would be seen as signifying genius if they were made by Bobby Fischer or Garry Kasparov can often be identified in a few seconds on a laptop. Computers do not evaluate each of these moves to quite the same depth. But they manage the trade-off a little differently than we do. They cast a wide net rather than look for one perfect solution.

If we expect to find the world divided into the deterministic contours of the possible and the impossible, with little room in between, we will wind up with overconfident predictions on the one hand, or unknown unknowns on the other. We just aren't that good at prediction, and we need to hedge our bets rather than believe solely in one hypothesis, as Phil Tetlock's hedgehogs did.

Perhaps no field puts these skills to the test more than matters of national security. As Bruce Schneier notes,86 the essence of a security problem is that it defines us by our weakest link. If you secure your front door with titanium plating, armed guards, and a phalanx of pit bulls, it doesn't do you any good if you also have a creaky side door that any two-bit burglar could break into. These threats are asymmetric; all of America's naval power in the Pacific didn't help it much when the Japanese fleet slipped right through the blind spots in our defenses and found that most of our arsenal was conveniently located in just one place, where it could easily be attacked. This is why events like Pearl Harbor and September 11 produce the sort of cognitive dissonance they do. Where our enemies will strike us is predictable: it's where we least expect them to.

Some of the type of thinking I encourage in this book can probably be helpful in the realm of national security analysis.87 For instance, the Bayesian approach toward thinking about probability is more compatible with decision making under high uncertainty. It encourages us to hold a large number of hypotheses in our head at once, to think about them probabilistically, and to update them frequently when we come across new information that might be more or less consistent with them.

The closest we came to catching Al Qaeda red-handed in advance of September 11 was in the arrest of Zacarias Moussaoui, the Islamic extremist who had an unnatural interest in learning how to fly a 747. Were there innocent explanations for that? I suppose he could have been some sort of flyboy with a lot of time on his hands. But if we had attached some prior possibility, even a small one, to the hypothesis that "terrorists might hijack planes and crash them into buildings," our estimate of its likelihood would surely have increased substantially once we came across this intelligence. Instead, however, we failed to consider the hypothesis at all—it was an unknown unknown to us. As the 9/11 Commission concluded, "the system was not tuned to comprehend the potential significance of this information," and so Moussaoui's arrest contributed little to our ability to foil the plot.88

This is not to suggest that our intelligence officials have gotten everything wrong. If some blame must be given for the failure to detect the September 11 attacks, some credit must be given to both the Bush and Obama administrations for the lack of attacks since then—something I certainly would not have predicted eleven years ago. Like a baseball umpire, an intelligence analyst risks being blamed when something goes wrong but receives little notice when she does her job well. I do not consider this field to reflect an unmitigated failure of prediction as I do some of the others in this book; considering the challenges it faces, it may be one of the more successful ones.

Still, as the 9/11 Commission deduced, the most important source of failure in advance of the attacks was our lack of imagination. When we are making predictions, we need a balance between curiosity and skepticism.89 They can be compatible. The more eagerly we commit to scrutinizing and testing our theories, the more readily we accept that our knowledge of the world is uncertain, the more willingly we acknowledge that perfect prediction is impossible, the less we will live in fear of our failures, and the more liberty we will have to let our minds flow freely. By knowing more about what we don't know, we may get a few more predictions right.