Arthur, W. B., Ermoliev, Yu, and Kaniovski, Yu. (1987a).「Path-dependent processes and the emergence of macro-structure.」European Journal of Operational Research, vol. 30, pp. 294–303.

Arthur, W. B., Ermoliev, Yu, and Kaniovski, Yu. (1987b).「Non-linear urn processes: asymptotic behavior and applications.」International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis. Paper WP-87-85, Laxenburg, Austria.

Arthur, W. B., Ermoliev, Yu, and Kaniovski, Yu. (1988).「Self-reinforcing mechanisms in economics.」In The Economy as an Evolving Complex System (P. Anderson, K. Arrow, and D. Pines (eds)). Reading, Massachusetts: Addison–Wesley.

Atkinson, A. and Stiglitz, J. (1969).「A new view of technical change.」Economic Journal, vol. 79, pp. 573–580.

Balcer, Y., and Lippman, S. (1984).「Technological expectations and the adoption of improved technology,」Journal of Economic Theory, vol. 34, pp. 292–318.

Bupp, I., and Derian, J. (1978). Light Water: How The Nuclear Dream Dissolved. New York: Basic.

Burton, R. (1976).「Recent advances in vehicular steam engine efficiency.」Society of Automotive Engineers, Preprint 760340.

Cowan, R. (1987).「Backing the wrong horse: sequential choice among technologies of unknown merit.」Ph. D. Dissertation, Stanford.

David, P. (1975). Technical Choice, Innovation, and Economic Growth. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

David, P. (1985).「Clio and the economics of QWERTY.」American Economic Review Proceedings, vol. 75, pp. 332–337.

David, P. (1987).「Some new standards for the economics of standardization in the information age.」In Economic Policy and Technological Performance, (P. Dasgupta and P. Stoneman, eds.) Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

David, P., and Bunn, J. (1987).「The economics of gateway technologies and network evolution: lessons from electricity supply history.」Centre for Economic Policy Research, Paper 119, Stanford.

Dosi, G. (1988).「Sources, procedures and microeconomic effects of innovation.」Journal of Economic Literature, vol. 26, pp. 1120–1171.

Dosi, G., Freeman, C., Nelson, R., Silverberg, G. and Soete, L. (eds.) (1988). Technical Change and Economic Theory, London: Pinter.

Farrell, J., and Saloner, G. (1985).「Standardization, compatibility, and innovation.」Rand Journal of Economics, vol. 16, pp. 70–83.

Farrell, J., and Saloner, G. (1986).「Installed base and compatibility: innovation, product preannouncements and predation.」American Economic Review, vol. 76. pp.940–955.

Fletcher, W. (1904). English and American Steam Carriages and Traction Engines (reprinted 1973). Newton Abbot: David and Charles.

Fudenberg, D., and Tirole, J. (1983).「Learning by doing and market performance.」Bell Journal of Economics, vol. 14, pp. 522–530.

Hanson, W. (1985).「Bandwagons and orphans: dynamic pricing of competing systems subject to decreasing costs.」Ph. D. Dissertation, Stanford.

Hartwick, J. (1985).「The persistence of QWERTY and analogous suboptimal standards.」Mimeo, Queen's University, Kingston, Ontario.

Hill, B., Lane, D. and Sudderth, W. (1980).「A strong law for some generalized urn processes.」Annals of Probability, vol. 8, pp. 214–226.

Katz, M., and Shapiro, C. (1985).「Network externalities, competition, and compatibility.」American Economic Review, vol. 75, pp. 424–440.

Katz, M., and Shapiro, C. (1986).「Technology adoption in the presence of network externalities.」Journal of Political Economy, vol. 94, pp. 822–841.

Kindleberger, C. (1983).「Standards as public, collective and private goods.」Kyklos, vol. 36, pp. 377–396.

Mamer, J., and McCardle, K. (1987).「Uncertainty, competition and the adoption of new technology.」Management Science, vol. 33, pp. 161–177.

McLaughlin, C. (1954).「The Stanley Steamer: a study in unsuccessful innovation.」Explorations in Entrepreneurial History, vol. 7, pp. 37–47.

Metcalfe, J. S. (1985).「On technological competition.」Mimeo, University of Manchester.

Rosenberg, N. (1982). Inside the Black Box: Technology and Economics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Strack, W. (1970).「Condensers and Boilers for Steam-powered Cars.」NASA Technical Note, TN D-5813, Washington, D. C.

Spence, A. M. (1981).「The learning curve and competition.」Bell Journal of Economics, vol. 12, pp. 49–70.

第 05 章　经济中的过程与涌现

Baker, W.「The Social Structure of a National Securities Market.」Amer. J.Sociol. 89, (1984): 775–811.

Clark, A. Being There: Putting Brain, Body, and World Together Again. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1997.

Eigen, M., and P. Schuster. The Hypercycle. Berlin: Springer Verlag, 1979.

Fontana, W., and L. Buss.「The Arrival of the Fittest: Toward a Theory of Biological Organization.」Bull. Math. Biol. 56 (1994): 1–64.

Holland, J. H.「The Global Economy as an Adaptive Process.」In The Economy as an Evolving Complex System, edited by P. W. Anderson, K. J. Arrow, and D. Pines, 117–124. Santa Fe Institute Studies in the Sciences of Complexity, Proc. Vol. V. Redwood City, CA: Addison-Wesley, 1988.

Hutchins, E. Cognition in the Wild. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1995.

Noria, N., and R. Eccles (Eds.) Networks and Organizations: Structure, Form, and Action. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Business School Press, 1992.

Wasserman, W., and K. Faust. Social Network Analysis: Methods and Applications. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 1994.

第 06 章　再好的经济和社会系统也会被「玩弄」

Appleton, Michael,「SEC Sues Goldman over Housing Market Deal.」New York Times, Apr. 16, 2010.

Arrow, Kenneth,「Uncertainty and the Welfare Economics of Medical Care,」American Economic Review, 53: 91–96, 1963.

Arthur, W. Brian.「Bounded Rationality and Inductive Behavior (the El Farol problem),」American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 84, 406–411, 1994.

Arthur, W. Brian, J. H. Holland, B. LeBaron, R. Palmer, and P. Tayler,「Asset Pricing under Endogenous Expectations in an Artificial Stock Market,」in The Economy as an Evolving Complex System II, Arthur, W. B., Durlauf, S., Lane, D., eds. Addison-Wesley, Redwood City, CA, 1997.

Axelrod, Robert. The Evolution of Cooperation. Basic Books, New York, 1984.

Bibel, George. Beyond the Black Box: The Forensics of Airplane Crashes. Johns Hopkins University Press, Baltimore, MD, 2008.

Boyes, Roger. Meltdown Iceland: How the Global Financial Crisis Bankrupted an Entire Country. Bloomsbury Publishing, London, 2009.

Campbell, Donald,「Assessing the Impact of Planned Social Change,」Public Affairs Center, Dartmouth, NH, Dec. 1976.

Cassidy, J., How Markets Fail: the Logic of Economic Calamities. Farrar, Straus and Giroux, New York, 2009.

Chrystal, K. Alec, and Paul Mizen,「Goodhart's Law: Its Origins, Meaning and Implications for Monetary Policy,」(http://cyberlibris.typepad.com/blog/files/Goodharts_Law.pdf), 2001.

Colander, David, A. Haas, K. Juselius, T. Lux, H. Follmer, M. Goldberg, A. Kirman, B. Sloth,「The Financial Crisis and the Systemic Failure of Academic Economics,」mimeo, 98th Dahlem Workshop, 2008.

Holland, John. Adaptation in Natural and Artificial Systems. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 1992. (Originally published 1975.)

Holland, John H., K. J. Holyoak, R. E. Nisbett and P. R. Thagard, Induction. Cambridge, MA, MIT Press, 1986.

Jonsson, Asgeir. Why Iceland? How One of the World's Smallest Countries Became the Meltdown's Biggest Casualty, Mc-Graw-Hill, New York, 2009.

Koppl, Roger, and W. J. Luther,「BRACE for a new Interventionist Economics,」mimeo, Fairleigh Dickinson University, 2010.

Lindgren, Kristian.「Evolutionary Phenomena in Simple Dynamics,」in C. Langton, C. Taylor, D. Farmer, S. Rasmussen, (eds.), Artificial Life II. Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA, 1992.

Mahar, Maggie. Money-driven Medicine. HarperCollins, New York, 2006.

March, James,「Exploration and Exploitation in Organizational Learning,」Organization Science, 2, 1, 71–87, 1991.

Morgenson, Gretchen (New York Times reporter),「Examining Goldman Sachs,」NPR interview in Fresh Air, May 4, 2010.

Nichols, S. L., and D. Berlner, Collateral Damage: How High-stakes Testing Corrupts America's Schools. Harvard Education Press, Cambridge, MA, 2007.

Pew Charitable Trusts,「History of Fuel Economy: One Decade of Innovation, Two Decades of Inaction」(www. pewtrusts. org), 2010.

Schneier, Bruce,「Cryptography: The Importance of Not Being Different,」IEEE Computer, 32, 3, 108–109, 1999.

Suderman, Peter,「Quit Playing Games with my Health Care System,」Reason, April 5, 2010.

Tabb, William, The Restructuring of Capitalism in our Time. Columbia University Press, New York, 2012.

White, Lawrence J.「The Credit Rating Agencies and the Subprime Debacle.」Critical Review, 21 (2–3): 389–399, 2009.

Zuill, Lilla,「AIG's Meltdown Has Roots in Greenberg Era.」Insurance Journal, 87, March 3, 2009.

第 07 章　技术究竟是如何进化的

Schumpeter, J. A. The Theory of Economic Development; Transaction Publishers: New Brunswick, NJ, 1911/1934/1996.

Lenski, R. E.; Ofria, C.; Pennock, R. T.; Adami C. The evolutionary origin of complex features. Nature 2003, 423, 139–143.

Beck-Sickinger, A.; Weber, P. Combinatorial Strategies in Biology and Chemistry; Wiley: Chichester, England, 2001.

Kauffman, S. A. Investigations; Oxford University Press: New York, 2002.

Bak, P.; Wiesenfeld, K. Self-organized criticality: An explanation for 1/f noise. Phys Rev A 1988, 38, 364.

Bryant, R. E. Graph-based algorithms for Boolean function manipulation. IEEE Trans Comput 1988, 35 (8), 677–691.

Bryant, R. E. Symbolic Boolean manipulation with ordered binary-decision diagrams. ACM Comput Surv 1992, 24 (3), 293–318.

Ogburn, W. F. Social Change; 1922 (Dell: New York, 1966).

Kaempffert, W. Invention and Society. Reading with a Purpose Series, 56, American Library Association: Chicago, 1930.

Arthur, W. B. The Nature of Technology: What It Is and How It Evolves; in preparation. (Appeared in 2009, The Free Press: New York.)

Maturana H.; Varela F. Autopoiesis and cognition: The realization of the living. Boston Studies in the Philosophy of Science 42; Cohen, R. S; Wartofsky, M. W., Eds.; D. Reidel Publishing: Dordrecht, 1973.

Arthur, W. B. The Logic of Invention. Santa Fe Institute Working Paper 2005-12-045; Santa Fe Institute: Santa Fe, NM, 2005.

Gehring, W. J. The genetic control of eye development and its implications for the evolution of the various eye-types. Int J Dev Biol 2002, 46, 65–73.

第 08 章　技术进化所引发的经济进化

Ashton, T. S., The Industrial Revolution, Oxford University Press, New York,1968.

Bartrip, P. W. J. and S. B. Burman, The Wounded Soldiers of Industry, Clarendon Press, Oxford, UK, 1983.

Chase, M., Early Trade Unionism, Ashgate, Aldershot, UK, 2000.

