5 THE LESSONS OF EXPERIENCE

Learning from experience in organizations is both an important phenomenon and a large industry. Business schools, publishers, publications, and consultants offer advice to business firms in parallel with an overlapping collection of schools, publishers, publications, and consultants specializing in public-sector organizations. To some extent, the groups flourish by equating improvement with learning, thus making the proposition that learning is a good thing into a tautology, but they provide ideas about how to achieve a「learning organization,」by which they mean an organization that uses mechanisms of learning to improve the return from actions. Some of the ideas come from research, some from experience, some from analysis, and some from various forms of personal imagination. They all seek to provide clues to improving organizational adaptiveness.

The efforts reflect a widespread belief that organizations need to improve their capabilities for comprehending and adapting to their environments (Argyris and Schön 1978; Etheredge 1985; Olsen and Peters 1996). The strategies for doing so include exploiting the learning found in academic theories of management and organization as translated and advocated by the purveyors of organizational advice. They also include developing capabilities for reacting intelligently to the lessons of direct experience. In this tradition, failures to improve intelligence through experience are due to human faults that are correctable through education and training.

The previous chapters have provided a few footnotes to those beliefs and efforts. They have explored some selected aspects of the possibilities, ambiguities, and problems of learning from experience. At the risk of using a few words to communicate what more words have already said, four general conclusions might be suggested.

• First, organizations and the people in them seek intelligence by modifying their expectations and understandings on the basis of the actions they take and the outcomes they observe. They learn both through low-intellect mechanisms that simply replicate successful actions, routines, or forms and also through high-intellect mechanisms that develop theories, models, and stories of history. Modifications in behaviors and understandings on the basis of experience are conspicuous aspects of human existence.

• Second, these mechanisms lead to palpable improvements in domains of relatively constrained activities that are repeated frequently. In such situations, the experience gained from repetitive practice frequently improves performance, although it ordinarily does not lead to an optimum, is subject to inadequate experimentation, and has limited generalizability.

• Third, in situations involving more complex causal relationships and fewer repetitions, experience is not a good teacher in the sense of reliably providing a clear basis for improvement in performance. However, in combination with the mythic themes provided by models and accepted story themes, the interpretation of experience develops conversational agreement, a sense of comprehension, a certification of the primacy of the human intellect, and (sometimes) a modicum of aesthetic achievement.

• Fourth, learning from experience requires experimentation for its long-run effectiveness but tends to extinguish it. Novelty is habitually vulnerable to effective learning. Nevertheless, novelty does arise in organizations and can, to a limited extent, be engineered.

EXPERIENCE AS A USEFUL TEACHER

There is no question that individuals and organizations regularly and routinely learn from experience in the sense of modifying behavior and understandings on the basis of experience. What is less self-evident is whether the lessons so readily learned from experience reliably improve performance or the likelihood of survival.

Experience is a significant source of intelligence in relatively isolated, narrow domains of frequently exercised specialized capabilities. Many common repetitive situations involve concrete specific knowledge. They provide relatively clear signals, relatively low levels of noise, and relatively large samples—adequate information for valid inference and palpable learning. Gardeners learn about the growth of plants, and although direct experiential knowledge about gardening is likely to be filled with superstition and half truths if it is not supplemented with knowledge gleaned from systematic experiments, experienced farmers typically know more than novice ones.

In a similar way, organizations learn how to operate successfully in specific contexts in which they find themselves. That knowledge is likely to be limited in application and generality, but it represents the useful fruits of trial-and-error learning, imitation, and selection in narrow domains. In almost every kind of specialized human activity, experience effects are positive. Experience, however, is not a perfect teacher. The replication of success often results in improvement, but it is not a particularly good way of discovering the best among many alternatives.

Perhaps the best-known pieces of evidence for the value of experiential learning are found in studies of so-called learning curves (Argote and Epple 1990; Argote 1999; Argote and Todorova 2007). In a number of well-documented studies, the unit costs of producing products have been shown to decline at a decreasing rate with the cumulative number of units produced (i.e., with experience). The more widgets a factory has produced in the past, the lower the cost of producing the next widget. A classic example is the way increases in cumulative experience reduce the hours required to assemble an aircraft. Likewise, both the time required to complete surgical procedures and the number of complications from surgery have been found to decrease at a decreasing rate with experience (Pisano, Bohmer, and Edmondson 2001; Reagans, Argote, and Brooks 2005).

The rate of improvement varies substantially from one product/procedure or organization to another. Organizations also sometimes independently exhibit improvement at a decreasing rate with the passage of time, but those gains (perhaps attributable to technological improvement in the environment) are usually smaller. Although it is generally easier to observe experiential improvement in unit costs or productivity than it is to anticipate the parameters involved in advance or to specify observable adaptive processes that have clearly produced the results, unit costs decline with cumulative units produced across a relatively large number of production operations.

In a similar, but less documented, way, continuing relationships (e.g., partners, bosses/subordinates, vendors, competitors) and the development of technical or artistic skills involve repeated experiences in constrained settings that are marked by fairly reliable improvement over time. Signals are clear; noise levels are low; sample sizes of experience are substantial. Partners develop reputations that are relatively reliable. Practice usually improves technical performance; the capabilities of lovers, artists, and plumbers can normally be expected to increase with experience. Ignace Paderewski, the great pianist (and briefly in 1919 the prime minister of Poland and signatory to the Treaty of Versailles), is reputed to have replied to praise from Queen Victoria that described him as a genius by saying「Perhaps, but before that I was a drudge.」

EXPERIENCE AS AN IMPERFECT

TEACHER

Despite its pervasiveness and the record of its successes, learning from experience faces numerous complications that limit its effectiveness. Underlying many of these complications are three conspicuous features of experience. The first is the vividness of experience; the second is the ambiguity of the lessons of experience; the third is the flexibility of interpretation.

Vividness of Experience

Direct experience is exceptionally vivid to the individual or organization experiencing it (Fischhoff 1975). The vividness of direct experience leads learners to exaggerate the information content of personal experience relative to other information. There are good reasons why any particular organization or individual might weight direct experience somewhat more heavily than the experience of others. For example, direct experience requires no generalization to demonstrate its relevance to the organization or person to whom it has occurred. However, the salience and dramatic force of experience combine with its difficulty of interpretation to make attempting to learn from experience a significant source of error. As Mark Twain observed, a cat that jumps on a hot stove is likely never to jump on any stove (hot or cold) again. As a result, the cat is likely to fail to discover the pleasures of jumping on cold stoves.

Consciousness of the problem does not reliably lead to doubts about experiential learning. The good sense of limiting attention to direct experience is overcome by the emotional force of the apparent lessons to be gained from experience. Consider, for example, a surgeon forming estimates of the risks of a surgical procedure. He or she has available extensive studies of the mortality rates associated with particular procedures, as well as recollections from his or her own experience. Since the risks associated with a particular surgeon are to some extent idiosyncratic to that surgeon, reflecting among other things the surgeon’s skill, it is sensible for any particular surgeon to weigh direct experience somewhat more heavily than the individual experiences of other individuals; but the vividness of personal experience ordinarily results in its being weighted too heavily compared with the aggregate experiences of many individuals. Where the risks are extremely small, only a surgeon with considerable experience will accumulate a sample of procedures performed large enough to warrant any significant modification of the aggregate statistics. In particular, the skewed distribution of occurrences of a low-probability event assures that substantially more surgeons will have experiences better than the average than will have experiences worse than the average. They will come to believe that the risks are less than they are.

Direct experience is similarly misleading in personnel decisions. Consider the frequent use of personal presentations or personal interviews in making hiring decisions. Such direct experiences are systematically more compelling than is warranted by the information they contain, and thus they typically are given too much weight. As a result, personal presentations, such as job talks, are more likely to degrade than to improve the effectiveness of personnel decisions. The erratic but compelling impressions of personal exposure overwhelm information gathered in a more systematic, more valid, but less compelling way (Dawes, Faust, and Meehl 1989).

Ambiguity of the Lessons of Experience

Experience has to be converted into lessons learned, and the conversion is both difficult and unending. As Simone de Beauvoir observed,「To declare that existence is absurd is to deny that it can ever be given a meaning; to say that it is ambiguous is to assert that its meaning is never fixed, that it must be constantly won」([1948] 1980, 129). Knowing what happened is sometimes possible, though it is often difficult. Knowing why it happened, and thus being able to make inferences about the events of the past, involves forming implicit or explicit causal inferences in situations that invite debate and error.

The ambiguity of experience has many causes and takes many forms, but a significant fraction of them can be summarized in terms of five attributes of experience:

• First, the causal structure of experience is complex. Many uncontrolled variables are involved, and their relations include multiple interactions and multiple colinearities. The relations among the variables may include numerous instances of feedback loops, a variety of time delays, and unknown functional forms. As a result, it is difficult to uncover the causal structure and to identify the effects of actions. For example, a legendary feature of organizational inference forming is the inclination to attribute outcomes (particularly favorable ones) to organizational actions in situations in which general economic or political conditions, the actions of others, and any number of other uncontrolled factors may contribute substantially. Moreover, many variables that seem likely to be important are difficult to observe and elusive to measure. As a result, the lessons derived from experiential learning are rife with unjustified conclusions, superstitious associations, misleading correlations, tautological generalizations, and systematic biases.

• Second, experience is noisy. The events of history are drawn from a distribution of possibilities, either because of errors in observation or interpretation or because the causal structure is truly stochastic. A particular realized history is likely to be a quite poor representation of the possibilities. As a result, learning from experience involves trying to learn not only from the actual events observed but also from the events that did not occur but might quite easily have occurred. The generation of such hypothetical histories replaces evidence with imagination, with all the invitations to error that such a substitution involves.

• Third, history includes numerous examples of endogeneity, cases in which the properties of the world are affected by actions adapting to it. Capabilities are affected by practice, and the rate of practice is affected by the choices made. Organizations and their environments coevolve. The desires (wants) of actors affect actions, but the actions also affect the wants. History is a series of samples, but the sampling rates, and therefore the sampling errors, of the various alternatives are affected by the unfolding of experience.

• Fourth, history as it is known is constructed by participants and observers. Individuals learn not from history but from historical stories, including the stories they tell themselves, that are concocted for a purpose. The spin doctor was as familiar to the writing of Egyptian history or Norse sagas as he or she is today. Winston Churchill has been quoted as saying,「History will be kind to me, for I intend to write it.」The proposition that the mean of lies converges to truth as the sample size increases is not easily demonstrated, either empirically or deductively.

• Fifth, history is miserly in providing experience. It offers only small samples and thus large sampling error in the inferences formed. If a statistician undertook to design an observational world that would frustrate inference, the resulting design might look a good deal like much of the natural experience of organizations. Organizations try to learn from small samples, often samples of one or fewer. They try to make inferences from observations of events involving unique, changing contexts and conditions. Without experimental control over key variables or a large sample of observations under varying (and observable) conditions, the search for causal identification is seriously compromised. Imagination becomes at least as significant as observation. As Marvin Minsky observed in contemplating the problems of artificial intelligence,「By themselves, simple learning systems are only useful in recurrent situations; they cannot cope with significant novelty. Nontrivial performance is obtained only when learning systems are supplemented with classification or pattern-recognition methods of some inductive ability. For the variety of objects encountered is so enormous that we cannot depend upon recurrence」(1963, 413).

The lessons of history can be hard to discern through participating in it. It is difficult for organizational participants to learn from experience, and their attempts to do so are prone to error (Mezias and Starbuck 2003; Baumard and Starbuck 2005). Experience often appears to increase significantly the confidence of successful managers in their capabilities without greatly expanding their understanding. The failures are not particularly due to weaknesses in managers or their training. Detecting the effects of variation in one or two factors in a complex system normally requires both holding other things constant and making big enough changes in the variables of interest to be detectable over the noise. In practice, organizations tend to change many things simultaneously and to make relatively small changes.

Flexible Interpretations

The events of ambiguous experience are given meaning through flexible interpretations. As the French poet-philosopher-historian Paul Valéry said,「History will justify anything. It teaches precisely nothing, for it contains everything and furnishes examples of everything」(quoted in White 1987, 36). Flexibility preserves mythic frames at the cost of weakening their predictive power. The trade-off makes more sense if the point is to preserve agreement on stories or to assure capabilities for explaining experience after the fact than it does if the point is to capture an extrastory reality or to use experience to predict the future. In general, stories and models are more commonly used for ex post explanations than for ex ante predictions.

Flexibility in interpretation is facilitated by natural language and symbolic abstractions and by the ways in which they are used. Natural language storytellers call forth meaning through language, particularly through metaphor (e.g.,「learning,」「exploration」and「exploitation,」「decision,」「power,」「garbage can」). Mathematical storytellers similarly call forth meaning through abstract symbols that allow imaginative extensions—for example, the interpretation of models of the spread of disease as models of the spread of technology.

A flexible quest for shared understandings that seem intelligent is probably more served by the ambiguities of history than frustrated by them. Failures can be interpreted to preserve belief (Baumard and Starbuck 2005). If a revolution fails, it may be because it was a bad idea, but it also may be because it was not pursued with enough vigor. If a policy fails, the failure may be a consequence of the policy, but it also may be a consequence of social forces or of inadequate or malicious implementation. If a pilot experiences a near collision with another aircraft, it may be a warning of dangerous practice and treated as a failure, but it also may be taken as an indication of superior skill in avoiding a collision and treated as a success (Tamuz 1988).

Interpretive flexibility assures that any specific experience will be consistent with a variety of different lessons. For example, many stories build on evaluations, and many of the evaluations of the experiences of organizations or their managements are justified by observations that could as easily justify quite different evaluations (March 1994, 87–89). The same managerial behavior can be labeled as either「bold」or「impetuous,」while its opposite can be labeled as either「careful」or「timid.」The difference between an「arrogant」manager and a「self-assured」one can be as difficult to discern as the difference between an「insecure」manager and a「consultative」one. It is not that evaluative stories are indifferent to data. They typically draw upon them extensively. But just as the same face can easily produce quite different, even contradictory, portraits, the same observations of organizational experience can produce evaluations that differ profoundly.

There are other features of standard frames that facilitate fitting disparate experience into standard frames. For example, the stories and models of social science are filled with tautologies. Power is the capability to get what one wants; it is measured by the extent to which one gets what one wants. Individuals pursue their interests; their interests are inferred from what they pursue. Things that are not understood are given labels that provide a linguistic appearance of explanatory power but are better seen as admissions of a lack of understanding or as place markers for subsequent development. In the stories of psychology,「personality」often serves as a label for what is not understood—the unexplained variance. In the stories of sociology and anthropology,「culture」plays a similar role, as do「power」in political science,「utility」in economics, and「mutation」in evolutionary biology. In popular stories,「human nature」often serves a similar purpose. Such labels give stories an aura of stable verisimilitude while providing a flexible fit to experience. They typically provide great capabilities for creating stories of post hoc explanatory appeal but little or no predictive power or engineering leverage.

Avoiding the Problems of Experience

Perhaps because of the conspicuous problems in interpreting history, much of the knowledge used in organizations develops in ways somewhat different from those that might be expected from a conception of experience-based action. First, much of what is believed in organizations is a collection of derivations from simple assumptions. The entire apparatus of the economic theory of organizations, for example, has very little detailed empirical basis. It consists primarily in theorems derived from a few elementary propositions about human behavior. The great advantage of such an approach to knowledge is that one can demonstrate the correctness of the theorems as a technical matter rather than as a matter of inference from data. Derivations within theories of organizations include a number of verifiable, but not particularly startling, predictions, such as the idea that increasing the wages offered for a position will increase the number of people willing to take the job. They also contain a few instructive surprises, such as propositions about the「the tragedy of the commons,」the「winner’s curse,」the「prisoners’ dilemma,」or「competency traps.」

Second, much of what is believed about organizations derives from an engineering conception of knowledge. A full scientific conception of knowledge seeks to understand a system well enough to be able to anticipate the necessary subsequent condition of any possible antecedent conditions. An engineering conception of knowledge seeks a set of antecedent conditions sufficient to produce a particular subsequent condition. A child learning to ride a bicycle does not attempt to understand the full intricacies of bicycle dynamics but only a set of movements and responses adequate to sustain balance and movement. An organization looks for organizational forms, practices, and products that are adequate to achieve targets and to improve in a familiar situation. It does not seek to know the likely consequences of all possible combinations of forms, practices, and products under all conditions.

Third, rather than seeking to understand a complex world, organizations often seek to create simpler worlds they can understand. Rather than build with materials freely available, they create materials with comprehensible and manageable attributes. Rather than try to understand the full richness of human behavior, they classify, train, and constrain human actors to make them comprehensible and manageable (Foucault 1961, 1975; Holmqvist 2008). Rather than depend on the future reliability of partners, they write contracts. Rather than run risks, they buy insurance. Rather than predict the outcomes of a gamble, they arbitrage among the differing expectations of others.

The Bottom Line

If there is one lesson to be gleaned from the explorations in this book, it is that learning from experience is an imperfect instrument for finding the truth. Much of organizational and managerial life will produce vividly compelling experiences from which individuals and organizations will learn with considerable confidence, but the lessons that they learn are likely to be incomplete, superstitious, self-confirming, or mythic. They will characteristically lead to suboptimal choices and are unlikely to yield valid characterizations of the causal processes underlying the experiences. Experience is likely to generate confidence more reliably than it generates competence and to stop experimentation too soon. As a result, there is a persistent disparity between the assurance with which advice is provided by experienced people and the quality of the advice. Berndt Brehmer (1980), the Swedish psychologist, summarized the evidence in a title for an article published in 1980:「In One Word: Not from Experience.」Experience may possibly be the best teacher, but it is not a particularly good teacher.

The observation is not that knowledge in general is impossible. Knowledge about human behavior can be impressive, but it is most impressive when it is embedded in stable cultural and institutional contexts or derived from settings where repeated, controlled observations are possible. In domains that are experienced less frequently and are less constrained, direct experience is often both less informative and more compelling. As a result, a subjective assurance of understanding derived from experience may be poorly correlated with genuine knowledge.

The contrast between the enthusiasms for experiential learning on the one hand and its deficiencies on the other have led to persistent efforts to discover alternative conceptions of inference more consistent with the possibilities of experience. Some of these procedures are effectively variations on multivariate statistics by which the underlying complexities are approximated through a combination of simple, generic models and large databases. They depend critically both on the efficacy of the simple models and on adequate numbers of observations. In ordinary experience, the former is doubtful and the latter is rare, so the usefulness of the technology is normally limited to large database formal research studies in domains in which the causal structure is transparent.

Alternatively, it is frequently argued that useful understanding of the causal basis of experience can be extracted from the small sample sizes of ordinary experience. Among others (e.g., Malan and Kriger 1998), I have argued that it is possible to learn from「samples of one or fewer」(March, Sproull, and Tamuz 1991). A similar argument runs through much of the advocacy of case studies (Herbst 1970; George and McKeown 1985; Mohr 1985),「thick description」(Geertz 1973; Gherardi 2006), and literature (Gagliardi and Czarniawska 2006; March 2008, chap. 18) as sources of knowledge.

The notion that it is possible to discern valid lessons about the world from detailed descriptions of specific episodes of ordinary experience finds an enthusiastic audience. It confirms the intuition and practice of most people. It reflects such a widely held belief that it is judicious to be cautious in denying it. However, it is hard to specify a theory of inference that sustains the idea unambiguously against a more conservative judgment of doubt. Although the literature exhibits a persistent aspiration that analyses based on rich descriptions and imagined histories may be linked to ideas about inference from empirical evidence, a conclusive justification of stories of experience as bases for genuine knowledge is more elusive than would be expected from the enthusiasm for it.

From the perspective of those who oppose it, the argument in favor of samples of one or fewer can be seen as an attempt to provide some kind of intellectual foundation for a deep human predilection to stories. Intellect is enlisted as an advocate for storytelling. Arguments are mobilized to provide a justification for the subjective sensations of pleasure and intelligence gained from converting instances of experience into possible understandings of the world. Since the ability and eagerness of human intellect to conjure utilitarian justifications for intuitive prejudices is one of the more endearing human traits, the efforts are often elegant and even persuasive.

Enthusiasm for learning from samples of one or fewer permeates ordinary life as well as much of social science and should not be summarily dismissed. In order to make the lessons from meager experience accessible, however, it is probably necessary to experience things richly, drawing on more aspects of history and more interpretations. It is probably necessary to consider events from the perspective of multiple preferences. It is probably necessary to supplement the data of history with the data of virtual experience, using「near histories」and hypothetical histories. In this way, the process of translating experience into understanding and understanding into action will often be an exercise of imagination that supplements or replaces data-based inference and logical derivation (March, Sproull, and Tamuz 1991).

EXPERIENCE AND HUMAN INTELLECT

The case for experiential knowledge as an effective instrument of adaptation is relatively weak in normal terms, but intelligence is not fully comprehended in terms of instrumental utility. In chapter 1, organizations were pictured as pursuing intelligence, and intelligence was presented as having two components. The first involves the instrumental utility of adaptation to the environment. The second involves the gratuitous interpretation of the nature of things through the use of human intellect. From the second point of view, experience is less a source of adaptive improvement than a stimulant to a fundamental human activity—the creation and decoration of irrelevant understanding.

Human intellect displays itself through curiosity about the world, through the gossip, conversations, stories, accounts, explanations, theories, and mythologies that (a) make existence meaningful in an interesting way (March and Sevón 1984), (b) provide rationalizations for willfulness (Feldman and March 1981), and (c) exhibit human imagination. Within such a perspective, understandings of experience are not so much instruments of life as they are life itself (Czarniawska 1997, 21); and the pursuit of meaning is less a method of effective adaptation than an essential activity of storytelling human beings (March and Olsen 1975, 1976; March 1994, 212–19).

Storytelling and the construction of models are elemental human activities by which human actors establish their own unique intelligence and the intellectuality of their species. In this perspective, storytelling and model building may be instrumental to adaptiveness, but that instrumentality is secondary to the differentiation that intellect provides, both among humans and among species. It is hard not to be charmed by such a vision of the intellectual primacy of irrelevant imagination. It strikes a chord that is sometimes drowned in the clatter of demands for utilitarian practicality. It conjures a dream of autonomy for intellect that glorifies one of the more distinct attributes of human existence. It grants an arbitrary status to the human mind. It is a kind of declaration of preeminence for aesthetic criteria of worth.

However, any such declaration of preeminence, even if it is resonant with classical human aspirations, represents a subordination of other legitimate claims. The ranking of claims of value is an unfortunate capitulation to the tyranny of theories of choice. The weighting of values rationalizes trade-offs but denies human capabilities for pursuing unresolved conflicts in desire. When my granddaughters were young, they had best friends, a not particularly noteworthy fact except that each of them had not one but numerous best friends—each best friend, I assume, a better friend than the others. I came to recognize that by refusing to calibrate the values of highly valued things in a way that assigned unique preeminence to any one of them, my granddaughters imported wisdom into grammar.

The creation and contemplation of imaginative understanding are distinctively and gloriously human, but they are not alone in this. Adaptive improvement through deliberate problem solving is also an exquisite feature of human distinctiveness. Intelligence involves the beauties of crafting understandings of experience, as reflected in the grace of storytelling and the elegance of model building. It also involves the efficiencies of adaptation, as reflected in the use of experience for careful analysis and pragmatic improvement. The lessons of experience are both monuments to the splendor of human imagination and instruments of effective problem solving. In tribute to the wisdom of granddaughters, each of these components of human intelligence can be seen as more important than the other.