3 LEARNING THROUGH STORIES AND MODELS

Organizations pursue intelligence through the low-intellect adaptive processes discussed in chapter 2. They also use high-intellect processes, which are the focus of this chapter. Low-intellect processes operate by replicating actions associated with experienced success. High-intellect processes operate by devising explicit understandings that fit the events of experience into a causal explanation through a natural language narrative, an analytical model, or a theory. Highintellect stories and models are bases both for refined understanding and appreciation of history and for differentiating among humans with respect to their knowledge.

Narratives of experience fill many studies of organizations, biographies and autobiographies of managers, journalist reports of organizational events, and the daily recitations of participants making sense of the events of organizational history. These narratives explore the events of episodes of history in order to discern the causal antecedents of experience. Similarly, models of experience fill many studies of organizations and the teachings of universities and consultants. Decision theory, economic theory, organization theory, game theory, and the stories told within those frames are centerpieces of organizational intelligence.

For some decades after the Second World War, stories and models generated by high-intellect processes for improving intelligence enjoyed a period of exceptional approbation. Although the fervor of the approval subsequently suffered from several conspicuous failures—most notably the defeat of the「best and the brightest」of the United States in Vietnam, the collapse of a monument to rational planning, the Soviet Union, and the orgies of disappointments with complicated strategies, hedge funds, and derivatives in financial markets—these stories and models of organizational life became almost taken for granted. They sustained a large collection of academics, writers, consultants, and practitioners.

High-intellect stories and models reflect the joint effects of two pressures. On the one hand, there is pressure that a story or model honor intelligence with subtlety and complexity that make it interesting. On the other hand, there is pressure that a story or model be simple enough to be comprehensible. The joint effect is a tendency for stories and models to be elaborate enough to celebrate human intellect but no more elaborate than their audience can tolerate. They tend to exhibit what might be called maximum comprehensible complexity.

Maximum comprehensible complexity is itself a function of the intelligence of audiences and the technology of stories and models, so it varies from one audience to another, from one instrument of storytelling to another, and over time. However, it is relatively insensitive to the underlying complexity of the process being described. Insofar as stories and models reflect maximum comprehensible complexity, they tend to be systematically more complex than simple processes and simpler than complex processes. The former tendency was explored briefly in chapter 2; the latter tendency is examined in this chapter.

STORIES AND MODELS

From the great Norse skalds (Sturluson 1984) to modern journalists (Halberstam 1972), humans have been inveterate storytellers. Roland Barthes (1977) describes narratives as universal, and Barbara Czarniawska (1997, 28) observes that interview respondents want to tell stories rather than answer questions. Managers, journalists, and scholars create and share stories and models of experience as bases for describing, explaining, and improving the events of organizational life and for establishing reputations for personal acumen. The objectives, techniques, and problems of such efforts are common among scholars, journalists, management consultants, and organizational participants. They are all storytellers and model builders (Weick 1995).

Stories and models are responses to an urge that permeates organizational life and organizations research. It is the urge to describe the causal basis of experience. Experience consists in a stream of events produced by processes that are complex, stochastic, and only partly observable. Causality is ambiguous. Generating an explanation of history involves transforming the ambiguities and complexities of experience into a form that is elaborate enough to elicit interest, simple enough to be understood, and credible enough to be accepted. The art of storytelling involves a delicate balancing of those three criteria.

Some features of human cognitive abilities and styles affect the ways stories and models are created from ambiguous and complex experience. Humans have limited capabilities to store and recall history. They are sensitive to reconstructed memories that serve current beliefs and desires. They have limited capabilities for analysis, a limitation that makes them sensitive to the framing that is given to experience. They conserve belief by being less critical of evidence that seems to confirm prior beliefs than of evidence that seems to disconfirm them. They distort both observations and beliefs in order to make them consistent. They prefer simple causalities, ideas that place causes and effects close to one another and that match big effects with big causes. They prefer heuristics that involve limited information and simple calculations to more complex analyses. This general picture of human interpretations of experience is well documented and well known (Camerer, Loewenstein, and Rabin 2004; Kosnik 2008).

These elements of individual human storytelling are embedded in the interconnected, coevolutionary feature of social interpretation. An individual learns from many others who are simultaneously learning from him or her and from each other. The stories and theories that one individual embraces are not independent of the stories and theories held by others. Since learning responds as a result to echoes of echoes, ordinary life almost certainly provides greater consistency of observations and interpretations of them than is justified by the underlying reality. In particular, ordinary life generally seems to lead to greater confirmation of prior understandings than is probably warranted.

Explanation fits experienced events into accepted frames. In economics, explanation involves demonstrating that observed events are consistent with the accepted axioms of rationality. In physics, explanation involves demonstrating that observed events are consistent with accepted physical laws. In fundamentalist religions, explanation involves demonstrating that observed events are consistent with accepted scripture. The key effort is to link experience with a preexistent accepted story line so as to achieve a subjective sense of understanding.

There are contending frames, of course, and the process of fitting experience into them involves negotiation over their comparative interest, comprehensibility, and credibility. The terms of such negotiation, particularly the relation between credibility and empirical validation, are the topics of treatises on scientific method and debates among scholars. Contestation over validity exhibits differences among scholars, but it typically depends on some level of shared recognition of a basic frame. Where such agreement is lacking, discussions of the interest, comprehensibility, and credibility of explanations can be acrimonious and incoherent. Experience interpreted within a Marxist frame is mostly unintelligible to a neoclassical economist. Experience interpreted within a Freudian frame is mostly unintelligible to a behavioral psychologist. And experience interpreted within a Foucauldian frame is mostly unintelligible to an organizational population ecologist.

The most obvious difference among storytellers of organizational experience is between those who see knowledge as expressed in natural language organized into narrative simplifications (roughly the literary/humanistic tradition) and those who see knowledge as expressed in abstract concepts organized into symbolic simplifications (roughly the mathematical/scientific tradition) (Snow 1959). Within the natural language contingent, the emphasis is on themes and grammars, and life is seen as represented by a narrative with conventions of texts. Within the symbolic language contingent, the emphasis is on the choice of mathematical frame, assumptions, and derivations, and life is seen as represented by a model with conventions of mathematical logic and formal rules of proof and inference.

Organizational storytellers, model builders, and theorists seek to make their interpretations both realistic and comprehensible, but the two objectives are inconsistent (Lévi-Strauss 1966, 261; Augier and March 2008, 96–98). Experience is rooted in a complicated causal system that can be described adequately only by a description that is too complex for the human mind. The more accurately reality is reflected, the less comprehensible the story, and the more comprehensible the story, the less realistic it is. The richness of life is made comprehensible only by creating portrayals of life that are, of necessity, incomplete. As Nietzsche (1997, 279) wrote:「Partial knowledge is more often victorious than full knowledge: it conceives things as simpler than they are and therefore makes its opinion easier to grasp and more persuasive.」

Stories and models simplify complex causal relations, reducing the number of variables involved, often ignoring second-and third-order effects, minimizing feedback effects, and glossing over variations in time delays. They often result in overfitting, explanations that provide post hoc interpretations of random variation that offer little subsequent predictive power. They simplify identities and the occasions for their evocation, reducing the nuance of identity fulfillment and the chaos of human obligations. They generally assume that causal stories are decomposable into simple subtexts that do not involve detailed interaction with each other. These simplifications necessarily reflect incomplete representations, but they facilitate comprehension. The models and stories of experience have to be in a form that can be communicated and understood.

The practitioners of natural language intelligence work endlessly through cycles of resolution and doubt, glorying in dilemmas, contradictions, and inconsistencies. Building on and venerating the indeterminacy of natural language, they interpret and reinterpret, less in a pursuit of closure than in a spirit of renewal (Ricoeur 1965; White 1987; Polkinghorne 1988; Czarniawska 1997; Gabriel 2004). The practitioners of analytical models similarly cycle between doubt and resolution but with a stronger conception of the possibility of progress toward the latter. They honor the openness and flexibilities of mathematics and statistics with their manifestations in imaginative extensions and systematic derivations. They see themselves as driven by a pursuit of extralinguistic truth (Kuhn 1962; Lave and March 1975; Williamson 1975; Scott 1981), but they find themselves persistently prone to statistical overfitting (Hastie, Tibshirani, and Friedman 2001).

In a manner quite similar to that of novelists and playwrights, managers, journalists, lawyers, and students of organizations eliminate and add facts to make a better (more compelling? more accurate?) story (Collingwood 1993). In the process, storytellers or model builders may reject some widely believed「facts」(e.g., miracles) as well as inject「facts」that are not observed but assumed (e.g.,「constitutive imagination,」「stylized facts」).

They also fit experience into a recognizable story line. Barbara Czarniawska wrote,「Stories do not emerge out of thin air; a great deal of collective work of the kind that Weick (1995) called sensemaking goes into their construction. . . . When a new event occurs, . . . it is made meaningful by setting it in an existing frame, even if it may mean that the frame must be somewhat adjusted and changed」(2008, 33, 38). Events are assembled into culturally familiar story types about them. For example, lawyers and courts create stylized stories and interpretations and seek both to learn from them and to provide their frames as bases for interpretations of testimony (Bennett and Feldman 1981).

Stories and models are never the product of one person alone. The storytellers have to deal not only with competing storytellers but also with the prejudices and expectations of listeners. They have to deal with participants who consciously seek to control interpretations by investing in authorized personal historians, called public relations experts or spin doctors. Storytellers have their individual sources and biases, but they have to gain acceptance of their stories by catering to their audiences. The primary way the themes underlying stories and models secure acceptance is through a social process of telling, retelling, reshaping, and evaluation by which interpretive ideas develop and diffuse through a population of storytellers and listeners involved in a common culture with a common language.

The idea that simplifications of experience within familiar frames are bases of human understanding and behavior is shared, though in somewhat different forms, by literary theorists (e.g., Ricoeur 1965), legal theorists (Dworkin 1986), phenomenologists (e.g., Schütz 1967; Berger and Luckmann 1967), symbolic interactionists (e.g., Blumer 1969; Van Maanen 1988, 1995), and ethnomethodologists (e.g., Garfinkel 1967; Cicourel 1974). The same processes of familiarization are evident in the development of formal models—for example, when the models of economics assume the easily comprehended form of models of physics (Mirowski 1989), or when complex systems of multiple variables are modeled as variations on linear regression (Greene 2008).

Thus, stories and models of experience are fictions seeking social confirmation as truth. They are fictions because truth is inaccessible. However, they represent a particular variety of fiction. They are fictions that explicitly invite confrontation with the evidence of observation, even while recognizing both the complexity of causality and the opaqueness of its observation. This tension between the aspirations for valid comprehensibility and the complexities and ambiguities of history permeates efforts to construct and confirm stories and models of experience. It also underlies challenges to the assumption that the simplifying heuristics of human cognition reflect regrettable irrationalities (Hogarth and Karelaia 2005; Gigerenzer and Brighton 2009).

Storytelling and model building also fuel the fundamental circularity of learning from experience. Humans are urged to learn from the experiences of history, but the experiences of history are encapsulated in frames invented by humans. Humans learn from their own inventions. The circularity does not preclude a meaningful augmentation of intelligence through exposure to experience, but it increases the possibilities for confusion and resistance to discrepant information in the process (Kuhn 1962).

THE STORIES OF ORGANIZATIONS

The world of organizations and management invites storytelling (Zaleznick 1989; Westerlund and Sjøstrand 1979; Gabriel 2004). Knowledge is sought about experience, but experience is ambiguous and its causal structure complex. Identities are ambiguous, and the ways in which they apply to particular situations are intricately multifaceted. The development and elaboration of stories and models of experience are a major part of the documentation of management. Participants are asked what happened and why it happened, and research often consists primarily in tabulating the stories told by storytellers (Sarbin 1986; White 1987; Collingwood 1993; Bruner 1996; Golden-Biddle and Locke 1997).

Stories of organizational experience are found in business cases taught in business schools and in administrative cases taught in public management programs. They are found in business plans discussed by venture capitalists and in discussions of administrative reform in government. They fill popular management books and the media. They are embedded in economic and organizational theories of choice. The storytellers of organizations are, for the most part, associated with the stock analyst, business press, political pundit, and academic trades. The ability to tell interesting, comprehensible, and credible stories is a mark of intelligence among observers of organizations.

The stories of organizations, like stories of many other parts of modern life, are told both in the guise of formal models and in the guise of narratives. Much of contemporary organizational economics assumes the form of a few simple equations (Gibbons and Roberts 2008) that can be used to provide economic interpretations of organizational regularities (Kreps 1990a). The ideas are abstractions representing elementary characteristics of organizational life that are used to interpret properties drawn from the elaborate details of that life. Much of the rest of contemporary literature reporting research on business firms or governmental agencies assumes a narrative form in which organizational experience is interpreted in terms of stories that extract a few themes from, or impose them on, the rich detail of organizational experience (Czarniawska 1997; Hernes 2008).

Often the stories are contested. Consider attempts to describe the rise of Microsoft and its human symbol, Bill Gates. In version 1 of the Microsoft story, Gates is pictured as a brilliant innovator and tactician with extraordinary insight and managerial ability. It is a variation on earlier stories of Andrew Carnegie and Henry Ford. In version 2 of the Microsoft story, Gates is pictured as a lucky bully who never had an original idea in his life but has been ruthless in stealing and promoting the ideas of others. It is a variation on the robber baron stories of the nineteenth century. One reason for the contestation is, of course, that the future of Microsoft and its competitors is itself contested. In the same way in which Americans are considerably more likely than non-Americans to attribute the rise to power of the United States to admirable properties of the nation and its citizens, positive stories of Microsoft are more characteristic of people who live in Seattle than of those who live in San José or Salt Lake City.

Some of the problems involved in high-intellect processes for experiential learning can be illustrated by efforts to convert the experiences of corporate history into an understanding of organizational profitability. Business firms sometimes do well, sometimes do poorly. Managers and researchers seek to use observed experience as a means for identifying attributes that differentiate high-performing (profitable) from low-performing (unprofitable) organizations. They try to tell acceptable stories about the reasons for the pattern that is observed, a pattern that typically arises from a complex combination of actions taken by many individuals and organizations, as well as the vagaries of fate.

Although claims of knowledge about the determinants of organizational performance are a standard feature not only of popular do-it-yourself books but also of the research literature, it is hard to avoid the conclusion that (within the standards of inference that are accepted as conventional in science) most studies of organizational performance are unable to untangle the causal structure affecting performance with any confidence. The difficulties stem, in large part, from (a) the extent to which organizations have assimilated past understandings and thereby considerably reduced variability in policies, practices, and forms; (b) the mismatch between the complexities of the causal system and the simplicity of the ideas used to describe it; (c) the dependence of profit on factors that are unobservable or simultaneously codetermined by profit; (d) the large number of uncontrolled factors; and (e) the small sample size of experience. These difficulties in identifying the causal structure of organizational performance are neither secret nor recently discovered (Staw 1975; Lenz 1981; March and Sutton 1997). They are regularly noted in critical reviews and are taught in elementary courses in quantitative and qualitative inference.

Despite the complications in extracting reality from experience, or perhaps because of them, there is a tendency for the themes of stories of management to converge over time. Ideas about the determinants of profitability come to be shared as part of the story of「good practice.」The interpretations of Bill Gates are likely to achieve some kind of shared understanding, as have the interpretations of Henry Ford and Genghis Khan. The shared understandings will not be based exclusively on accumulated evidence, although it will certainly accumulate. Rather, they will develop as conventions of discourse, as part of what it means to be an educated person and as part of establishing standing in ordinary conversations.

MYTHIC THEMES

Standard journals and books dealing with both the private and public sectors tell stories of organizational history that emphasize a few conventional themes. Included in those themes are some easily recognized ideas about experience. Outcomes are produced by people, and thus stories of people and events are intertwined. The world is one in which there is competition for primacy, and only the fittest survive. Problems have solutions, and those solutions can be found by intelligence. The world changes, and ability to adapt is necessary for survival. These stories and story themes are obviously vital to the ways in which people in organizations comprehend their histories. They form the bases of interpreting experience and the frames within which experience can be shared.

In particular, stories of organizational experience are deeply affected by themes that are accurately described as myths:「Any real or fictional story, recurring theme, or character type that appeals to the consciousness of a people by embodying its cultural ideals or by giving expression to deep, commonly felt emotions」( The American Heritage Dictionary of the English Language 1981).

Myths are instruments for reducing the confusions of experience, human comprehension, and human enactment. Stories or models with mythic standard story lines provide comprehensible meaning and credibility (Vygotsky [1962] 1986; White 1987). Mythic story lines are not straitjackets. They combine sacredness (and stability) with some openness to variation. Constructing stories from mythic themes involves many different stories and substories (mythemes in Lévi-Strauss’s terms) that provide plenty of material for bricolage by storytellers (Lévi-Strauss 1966, 1979). The options are, however, limited by the necessity to construct a story that will be deemed credible, and credibility thrives on familiarity.

Organizational stories and models are built particularly around four main mythic themes (March 1999b). The first mythic theme is the myth of rationality: the idea that the human spirit finds definitive expression through taking and justifying action in terms of its future consequences for prior values. Action is understood as reflecting choice, and choice is seen as made in terms of consequences.

Rationality is seen as both a dictum of good behavior and a prediction of behavior. It is pervasive in the stories and models of both public and private management. It underlies the extensive discussions of「incentives」as critical to organizational behavior. It is the basis of answers to the question「why did you/he/she/they/I/we do that?」The answer is given in terms of expectations of consequences and incentives: the action was taken because it made consequential sense. In the conventions of economics as those conventions have become folk wisdom, behavior is explained when a rational consequential reason can be given for it.

The second mythic theme is the myth of hierarchy: the idea that problems and actions can be decomposed into nested sets of subproblems and subactions such that interactions among them can be organized within a hierarchy. Hierarchical decomposition is the basis for the hierarchical organization of problem solving and organization. It involves a combination of decentralized (in parallel) work and integration, with integration being hierarchical. Responsibility for accomplishing a complex task can be arranged in a system of subordination and domination in which each higher level controls and integrates the solutions and actions at a lower level. Ideas about hierarchically organized control and accountability permeate organizational stories. They are reflected in organization charts and business plans. They are the basis for efforts to allocate personal responsibility for success and failure and for a host of standard prescriptions for effective organizational structures.

The myth of hierarchy suppresses the possible importance of other kinds of network structures. For example, the symmetry of the story of game theory with its coalitions among parallel actors is transformed in discussions of organizations into a story of hierarchically dominant「principals」who achieve their objectives through clever management of incentives offered to subordinate「agents」(Milgrom and Roberts 1992). The intricacy of informal networks and their importance are subordinated to the formal hierarchy of an organization.

The third mythic theme is the myth of individual leader significance: the idea that any story of history must be related to a human project in order to be meaningful and that organizational history is produced by the intentions of specific human leaders. In typical organizational stories or models, individual actions are presumed to be the basic building blocks for understanding organizational experience. Events of history are seen as due to human intentions and as produced by the interaction of identifiable individual projects of competition and cooperation (Polkinghorne 1988). Major developments in organizational history are imagined to be attributable to exceptional human action and capabilities, that is, to the actions of leaders.

Managerial/organizational history is as filled with heroes as is military history, from which it takes many of its metaphors (Kieser 1997). A fascination with the rise and fall of companies is translated into stories of the rise and fall of leaders. Just as stories of the rise and fall of armies become stories of the competence and incompetence of generals, stories of the growth and decline of business firms become stories of the vision and lack of it of CEOs. The identity, character, and obligations of leadership are common foci for managerial education.

The fourth mythic theme is the myth of historical efficiency: the idea that history follows a path leading to a unique equilibrium defined by antecedent conditions and produced by competition. The theme is an essential basis for the emphasis on market competition as a selective mechanism among business organizations. The basic ideas are that history favors those individuals, organizations, forms, practices, and beliefs that match the requirements of their environments; that efficiency is assured through competition; and that survival is evidence of superior fit to environmental requirements. Historical efficiency is an elementary idea borrowed from classical functionalism as supplemented by Malthus ([1798] 2001) and Darwin ([1859] 2006). Competitive outcomes are seen as necessary in an environment; victories result from superiorities; defeats result from deficiencies.

Historical efficiency appears in stories of the triumph of good organizational practices (e.g., quality circles, new public management, lean production, business process reengineering, total quality management, organizational culture, knowledge management) over inferior practices. It appears in the inclination to treat the results of market or political competition as natural and necessary. Patently, there is a certain inconsistency between the myth of individual leader significance and the myth of historical efficiency, but the combination of familiar but inconsistent themes is a common feature of human storytelling.

The four myths are by no means an exhaustive listing of the themes available to organizational storytellers. There are many others of varying consistency with them and of varying acceptability. In particular, each of the main themes has a countertheme that is well enough known to qualify as a possible element in a story. The countertheme to the myth of rationality is the theme of identity. Rather than following a logic of consequences, individuals match situations to the demands of an identity. The countertheme to the myth of hierarchy is the theme of nonhierarchical networks. Individuals are joined in complicated networks of associations. The countertheme to the myth of individual leader significance is the theme of complexity. History is made by the actions of complex combinations of many individuals. The countertheme to the myth of historical efficiency is the theme of historical inefficiency. The processes of adaptation are slow and have multiple equilibria.

Stories built on the main myths undoubtedly will more easily find credence than will stories built on the counterthemes, but part of the process of mythic development is found in the experiments with themes by storytellers. They provide opportunities to elaborate the main myths to accommodate new refinements and to test the possibilities for fundamental reorientation of the mythic basis of stories. At the same time, the way in which counterthemes are positioned as denials of the primary themes tends to highlight the central intellectual position of the latter.

Underlying many of these myths is a grand myth of human significance: the idea that humans can, through their individual and collective intelligent actions, influence the course of history to their advantage. Such a myth is both a matter of faith and a basis for interpretations of experience. It is widely accepted as obvious, though it is clearly more widely believed in successful organizations and cultures than in those where success is less familiar. It is not self-evident—or perhaps only that.

The myth of human significance produces the cruelties and generosities stemming from the human inclination to assign credit and blame for events to human intention. Responsibility for social and economic well-being is allocated to political parties and politicians. Responsibility for profits and losses and for changes in stock value is allocated to managers of firms. Responsibility for public satisfaction or dissatisfaction with social programs is allocated to political leaders or to managers of governmental agencies, creating「adequately blameworthy」agents (Shklar 1990, 62). In the course of such allocation of responsibility, any possible distinction between personal moral responsibility as a confirmation of human significance and behavioral responsibility as an assertion of causality tends to be lost. As Robert Reich (1985, 23–28) observes,「There is an overwhelming tendency in American life to lionize or pillory the people who stand at the helms of our large institutions—to offer praise or level blame for outcomes over which they may have little control.」These certifications of human control over destiny are precious to human ideology (Czarniawska 1997, 38–39). On a more mundane level, the myth of accountability that they sustain affects managerial behavior in observable ways (Tetlock 1992).

TRUTH, JUSTICE, AND BEAUTY

Stories and models of experience comprise a large fraction of the effort to learn from experience by educated observers of organization. They find their primary traditional value in their claim to being accurate representations of an extralinguistic truth, but they also find value in their contributions to justice—creating social order—and beauty—the aesthetic pleasure they provide.

Truth Value

Within conventional interpretations, intelligent action demands accurate comprehension of the world, and an accurate comprehension of the world demands an accurate interpretation of experience. Insofar as the themes on which the stories of experience are built either correctly portray the world or create the world, the stories will provide useful guides for action. Words such as「reality,」「accurate interpretation,」and「correct portrayal」are anathema to purists of social construction, but for most people they have patent relevance to a discussion of learning.

Although it is widely believed that organizations or scholars can, in principle, develop stories and models that correctly represent the underlying reality of organizational life (Argyris and Schön 1978; Nonaka and Takeuchi 1995), the procedures by which stories and models are created, in themselves, offer few guarantees of validity. This is not primarily because human learners are incompetent. The reality they are asked to reflect is difficult to discern in ordinary experience, even with the best tools of observation and inference. The world is too complex and experience is too meager. For example, business school students are trained to take events of simulated experience in business cases and interpret them according to the frames they have been provided, primarily from economics but on other occasions from organization studies, accounting, operations research, marketing, or other domains. The exercise may well be useful, but it would be hard to claim that the interpretive stories they tell are unambiguously implicit in the events.

Similarly, stories interpreting observed experience are among the earlier and more respected contributions to research in organization studies. Examples include studies by Abegglen (1958) of the Japanese factory, Gouldner (1954) of industrial bureaucracy, Roethlisberger and Dickson (1939) and Walker and Guest (1952) of worker groups, Whyte (1955) of street corner organization, Selznick (1949) of cooptation, and Kaufman (1960) of the forest ranger. These studies, as well as many others like them, have been very important sources of ideas for students of organizations, although it is hard to view the ideas presented as unambiguously implicit in the events described in the studies. Indeed, some of the more artful practitioners of the craft resist making their own explicit interpretations, leaving meanings to be elaborated by others (Chekhov 1979; Krieger 1979).

Stories from experience are often profoundly believed and widely shared, but neither the depth of beliefs nor the generality of agreement about them speaks decisively to their validity. Moreover, the comprehension of experience is often contested. Widely shared beliefs are widely challenged. Contemporaries argue about what happened and why it happened. Beliefs about the lessons of experience are often localized by political or linguistic boundaries. Colonial history is told differently in different places. Individuals write memoirs and autobiographies, seeking to affect interpretations of the events of history, but they do not agree among themselves. As is often observed, history is written by the winners. In particular, history as recorded is a story told to (and by) victorious leaders. As a result, it is usually a story of the actions and intentions of leaders and mirrors the properties of skaldic histories of glorious heroes.

Although conventionalized understandings often endure for extended periods, any portrayal of historical interpretation as stable over time is inconsistent with the history of history. Beliefs about historical experience change gradually, partly in response to new information and partly in response to new interpretive ideas. As the prejudices of dominant groups change, the stories of history reflect changing political correctness: Puritan rigidities change from symbols of steadfastness to symbols of bigotry. Native Americans change from savages to environmental pioneers.

In his famous parable about the emperor’s new clothes, Hans Christian Andersen (1837) reminds his readers of the extent to which the social conception of reality may deviate from palpable truth. The story of the emperor’s clothes, however, is potentially misleading. The storyteller reveals explicitly that the emperor is, in fact, naked. He invites his readers to see the ludicrous way in which social validation of a palpable falsehood is sustained until challenged by an innocent, not fully socialized boy. Thus, the readers of the story know the truth and see the errors of social consensus and conformity.

In the more typical case in real life, the truth is obscure. What is known is that almost everyone agrees that something is true, even though it may not seem to be true to a particular individual. This latter situation is considerably more problematic than the former. Confronted with consensus beliefs that the world is round, what are we to make of our own experience that seems to indicate it is flat? Confronted with consensus beliefs that smoking tobacco has adverse long-run effects, what are we to make of our own experience that smoking seems to make us feel better?

Much as the plots of acceptable romantic comedies can be specified by a student of films, the frames of most stories could probably be written without any knowledge of the specific events to be described. Indeed, part of the argument for stories and models is that the enduring frames on which they are based are closer to the truth than any particular set of contemporary observations. Is it possible that the story frames and models that we accept present truer pictures of reality than our direct experience? Giambattista Vico ([1725] 1961; Bitney 1969) argued that myths capture the essential elements of history, removing the irrelevant noise of actual events. In a similar way, it has been argued that a meta-analysis of numerous incomplete and erroneous stories of the rise of Nokia can be made to yield a valid story (Lamberg, Laukia, and Ojala 2008). And Kathryn March reported that the stories told by Tamang women about the experiences of their lives「are epics because what they tell is larger than any one telling, larger even than the sum of all possible tellings. They reach beyond themselves, full of connections apparently outside of, but in the end an integral part of, the stories」(2002, 12).

Likewise, a student of economics is assured that although immediate direct experience may sometimes seem to disconfirm the teachings of economic models, the problem is more likely to lie with the observations or their interpretations than with the theory.

The claims are powerfully instructive, and they evoke childhood memories of treating the poor results of classroom physics experiments as evidence of incompetent experimental techniques rather than erroneous theories. However, the claims are difficult either to validate empirically or to derive from widely believed assumptions. The argument suggests a kind of「central limit theorem」in which the random noise that confuses the interpretation of immediate experience is reduced by the pooling of experience reflected in the accepted frames of stylized stories. The number and credibility of assumptions required to justify the derivation are, however, daunting.

On the surface, at least, it appears that, outside closely constrained domains involving repeated experience, ordinary experience (observation) will not yield much in the way of unambiguously valid lessons if we apply the standards of evidence that are shared widely among scholars. Anton Chekhov in a letter to his publisher, A. S. Suvorin, on May 30, 1888, wrote,

It is time for writers, and particularly for artists, to admit that you can’t figure out anything in this world, as Socrates once admitted and as Voltaire kept admitting. The public thinks it knows and understands everything; and the dumber it is the broader its horizons seem to be. However, if an artist whom the public believes decides to state that he understands nothing of what he sees, that in itself is of great significance in the realm of thought and is a great step forward. (Chekhov 1979, 270)

A similar kind of humility has been suggested for statistical model builders. The more general the model (i.e., the more alternative patterns of relationships and functional forms it allows), the greater the likelihood that the model will, in effect,「fit」the noise in the system, resulting in a good fit but poor predictability. This bias-variance dilemma (Geman, Bienenstock and Doursat 1992; Gigerenzer and Brighton 2009) forces a choice between the overfitting errors of complex models and the oversimplicity of simple ones.

Humility on the part of high-intellect learners and skepticism about the lessons they propose seem clearly warranted, but is there some alternative? Is it possible to justify as anything other than a personal or social prejudice our intuitive acceptance of some stories and rejection of others as containing germs of truth? By what criteria do we (or ought we to) judge one story as more credible than another? The plays of writers such as William Shakespeare, Henrik Ibsen, or Anton Chekhov are often portrayed as revealing important truths about the human condition and human behavior (O’Connor 2008). Indeed, they are sometimes used to instruct managers or those who aspire to be managers (Gagliardi and Czarniawska 2006). For example, Ibsen’s plays have been used to develop the idea that powerful ideals suborn lies and to argue that such a mechanism operates in contemporary organizations (March 2008, chap. 20). The poetry of William Yeats has been used to explicate the managerial dilemma of speaking a rhetoric of decisiveness, certainty, and clarity while experiencing a life of doubt, paradox, and contradiction (March 2008, chap. 19). The theorems of game theory and the metaphors of garbage cans have been used to interpret the strategic behavior of business firms (Gibbons 1992; 2003). What does it mean to say that such observations resonate with our understandings and thereby deserve credence? How do we judge whether they are true?

Novelists, playwrights, artists, and social scientists all claim veracity in their stories and models, a link to widely shared understandings of the nature of experience. Some would say that what distinguishes the two groups is a difference in the willingness to see their specific stories or models as part of an explicitly collective endeavor to discover truth (Kuhn 1962) and thus, in principle, as disconfirmable through evidence. The difference is important, but it does not change a fundamental similarity. The stories of novelists and social scientists are judged, in part, on whether they are credible, and it seems unlikely that the assessment of credibility is enormously different in the two cases.

How do we assess the credibility of stories told by Chekhov? Is it different from the way we assess the credibility of stories told by Weick? Is credibility distinct from artistry? From technique? What are data of experience and how do they enter the calibration of credibility? Can credibility be separated from interest and ideology? Or from familiarity? The point is not to pretend to settle such issues. They seem to endure comfortably in the face of innumerable efforts to resolve them. The point is to observe that there is by no means general agreement that the stories and models of organization studies are more (or less) credible than the stories of novelists or playwrights.

In order to develop a technology for assessing credibility of stories and models, it will probably be necessary to recognize explicitly the tenuous link between experience and reality. When Carlos Fuentes (e.g., in Aura), Gabriel García Márquez (e.g., in 100 Years of Solitude), or Isabel Allende (e.g., in Stories of Eva Luna) writes of worlds in which reality and fantasy are difficult to distinguish, each speaks not only for novelists but also for social scientists. The best of both breeds seeks to exhibit veracity and do so by methods in which imagination is often given an importance comparable to observation in capturing an elusive reality.

The possibility of extracting more information about an underlying reality from small, rich samples motivates modern work on「hypothetical histories.」Such histories require the use of observed experience and imagination to generate distributions of possible experiences. In the process, possibilities derived from speculation are promoted to approximately the same status as observed reality (Tetlock 1999). It is a tempting direction, but it is difficult to provide persuasive demonstration of its validity or definitive elaboration of a standardized methodology to accomplish it.

Justice

The truth value of stories and models seems difficult to establish, but the stories told about experience are not simply instruments of causal truth. The myths and themes that frame experience are entrenched in, and at the same time contribute to, the development of taken-for-granted social structures. Many organizational endeavors are more dependent on the sharing of understandings (reliability) than on their correctness (validity).

Shared understandings are the basis for conversations among human actors, conversations that lead the actors to imagine a common experience, permit them to coordinate their actions more easily, and help them to shape and enforce social norms of justice (Bartel and Garud 2009). In the language of classical organization theory, stories and models are devices by which uncertainty is absorbed (March and Simon 1958, 164–66). They allow action to take place within comprehensible stories rather than incomprehensible reality. Convergence on a story of group history is particularly important. In that spirit, Benedict Anderson (1991) argued that a sense of nationality involves understandings of an imagined community built on a constructed history through a judicious combination of amnesia, invention, and interpretation.

Such understandings are also significant factors in creating a viable social system of justice. Justice is a difficult aspiration to define and to achieve. It requires broad agreement within a society on elements of fairness and on individual and social responsibilities. The stories and models of high-intellect learning are part of the apparatus by which such agreement is obtained. They facilitate social convergence of belief and individual and social confidence in intelligence.

At the same time, storytelling provides a basis for social approval. Being able to tell a sharable and interesting story of experience is an important aspect of the intelligence both of participants and of scholars. The ability to tell a convincing, high-intellect story about experience marks a superior manager, a superior researcher, and a superior consultant. Developing such capabilities is a primary responsibility of organizations. In that spirit, John Stuart Mill wrote,「The first element of good government being the virtue and intelligence of the human beings composing the community, the most important point of excellence which any form of government can possess is to promote the virtue and intelligence of the people themselves」([1861] 1962, 32). Thus, life in organizations is marked by a quest for stories and models of maximum comprehensible complexity, an interpretation of life that is simultaneously suitably interesting and suitably comprehensible to signal intelligence, and for the development of individuals who can expound such interpretations.

Beauty

The Anglican struggle over retaining the King James translation of the Bible in spite of its translation confusions, or the more general struggle within Jewish, Muslim, and Christian communities over challenges to the historical accuracy of biblical accounts, are reminders that beauty and veracity are not necessarily codeterminate. Keats’s proposition that「beauty is truth, truth beauty」is an enchanting idea but not readily demonstrable. In the prosaic domains of ordinary life, it seems obvious that many things that are true about human existence are far from beautiful, and many things that are beautiful are not true.

Beauty, truth, and justice are independent components of virtue, but beauty is not a lesser value than the others. The classic trinity of scholarly worth does not subordinate one value to any of the others (Lave and March 1975). Nowhere is that independent autonomy more important than in stories of organizations. Organizational life is given value by the ability to tell a story of beauty about it. Ideas are a form of art (March 2008, chap. 1).

It is a vision that resonates with the better examples of the organization storytelling craft. When John Padgett and his colleagues describe the origins of Florentine political and economic organization (Padgett and Ansell 1993; Padgett and McLean 2006), or Karl Weick (1996) describes the reaction of a firefighting crew to crisis, or Steven Barley (1986) describes the way in which CAT technicians make sense of their machines, or Charles Perrow (1984) describes the orchestration of accidents, the stories are beautiful. When Harrison White (1970) describes vacancy chains, or Albert Hirschman (1970) describes the trade-offs among exit, voice, and loyalty, or Thomas Schelling (1978) derives macro implications from micro motives, or William Feller (1968) describes stochastic processes, the models are beautiful. The beauty is neither incidental nor guaranteed. It is carefully crafted and not reliably exhibited in the stories and models produced by others.

Even a casual reading of the history of human civilizations suggests that the production and appreciation of objects that provide aesthetic pleasure are significant aspirations of intelligence. Nietzsche described the historian’s job as「inventing ingenious variations on a probably commonplace theme, in raising the popular melody to a universal symbol and showing what a world of depth, power and beauty exists in it」(1957, 37–38). It is not a bad job description for those who would capture the lessons of experience through stories and models.