

基础卡片：编程的两大哲学观点2023-11-05内容：参考：保罗·格雷厄姆.(2013).2018112黑客与画家.(阮一峰.译).人民邮电出版社 => 1101一百年后的编程语言原文：This happy story, though, has a sad interlude, an interlude that might be attributed to the failure of AI to soar, but which probably has some other grains of truth that we must heed. The key problem with Lisp today stems from the tension between two opposing software philosophies. The two philosophies are called「The Right Thing」and「Worse is Better.」1-2『编程上的两大哲学观点，直觉上是很重要的知识点。做一张任意卡片。』——已完成I and just about every designer of Common Lisp and CLOS has had extreme exposure to the MIT/Stanford style of design. The essence of this style can be captured by the phrase「the right thing.」To such a designer it is important to get all of the following characteristics right:• Simplicity — the design must be simple, both in implementation and interface. It is more important for the interface to be simple than the implementation.• Correctness — the design must be correct in all observable aspects. Incorrectness is simply not allowed.• Consistency — the design must not be inconsistent. A design is allowed to be slightly less simple and less complete to avoid inconsistency. Consistency is as important as correctness.• Completeness — the design must cover as many important situations as is practical. All reasonably expected cases must be covered. Simplicity is not allowed to overly reduce completeness.I believe most people would agree that these are good characteristics. I will call the use of this philosophy of design the「MIT approach.」Common Lisp (with CLOS) and Scheme represent the MIT approach to design and implementation. The worse-is-better philosophy is only slightly different:• Simplicity — the design must be simple, both in implementation and interface. It is more important for the implementation to be simple than the interface. Simplicity is the most important consideration in a design.• Correctness — the design must be correct in all observable aspects. It is slightly better to be simple than correct.• Consistency — the design must not be overly inconsistent. Consistency can be sacriﬁced for simplicity in some cases, but it is better to drop those parts of the design that deal with less common circumstances than to introduce either implementational complexity or inconsistency.• Completeness — the design must cover as many important situations as is practical. All reasonably expected cases should be covered. Completeness can be sacriﬁced in favor of any other quality. In fact, completeness must sacriﬁced whenever implementation simplicity is jeopardized. Consistency can be sacriﬁced to achieve completeness if simplicity is retained; especially worthless is consistency of interface.