## 0101. Principles of Classic Style

### 1.5 Other Stands, Other Styles

There is nothing new in the idea that a style is effectively a stand on a small number of central issues, and therefore that many different mature styles are possible. Classical rhetoricians analyzed contrasting styles from this perspective, and routinely demonstrated that what was good or appropriate to one style might be bad or inappropriate to another. By contrast, many modern books on「style」have, for one reason or another, suggested that there are only two styles: good and bad. On closer inspection, it becomes apparent that each of these modern books is actually about one style, not about style generally. For example, Strunk and White or Williams and Colomb work from an implicit model of writing as meant to be read by either (a) an indefinite audience not defined by working roles but having more-or-less common cultural and social standards; or (b) a somewhat more definite audience of working professionals with corporately defined roles. What Strunk and White recommend is meant as good advice for the one style they have in mind; what Williams and Colomb recommend is good advice for the one style they have in mind. Both assume a single cast and a single scene. But consider texts with quite a different cast or scene, such as a diplomatic address opening peace negotiations in the Middle East, or Pericles' Funeral Oration, or Samuel Johnson's「Preface to Shakespeare,」or an address by Martin Luther King, Jr., to a large crowd of political activists. Were we to subject texts of this sort to editorial revision inspired by a careful study of Williams and Colomb or Strunk and White, the result would be simply the destruction of a style. These writers and speakers certainly break many of the「rules」to be found in Style and The Elements of Style, but that is because the styles discussed in those books are foreign to the styles chosen. It is unreasonable to expect that addressing a giant rally in Washington and writing a memo to the vice president for finance on the consequences of the new tax code should have lying behind them the same stylistic stand, or that either one of them should have the same stylistic stand as an article for The New Yorker or Johnson's explanation of Shakespeare's claim to our attention.

Classical textbooks such as Cicero's Orator, the pseudo-ciceronian Rhetorica ad Herennium, and Demetrius's On Style list principal styles and explain their origins in different purposes, motives, or occasions. The standard list includes high, middle, and low style, otherwise called grand, middle, and simple. Demetrius gives instruction in restrained, elevated, elegant, and forcible style. Aristotle in the Rhetoric notes in passing that each kind of rhetoric has its own appropriate style: for example, the style of political speech cannot be the style of forensic speech because their originary purposes, scenes, and casts are opposed.

Classical rhetoricians routinely analyze the relationships between distinct styles. Elegant style, Demetrius explains, can unite with restrained style, but elevated style cannot, because elevated style and restrained style「stand in irreconcilable opposition and contrast」: their fundamental decisions are consistently incompatible.

Certain failures to achieve a successful style are so predictable and common as to constitute styles of their own, which might be called styles that do not succeed. The Rhetorica ad Herennium explains how swollen style, slack style, and meager style arise as particular kinds of failure to achieve grand, middle, or simple style, suggesting that each good style has at least one deformed double. Longinus introduces us to two deformed versions of sublime style, each of which is a product of a particular kind of failure to achieve it. Bloated style「comes from trying to outdo the sublime.」Adolescent style comes from puerility,「the opposite of greatness: abject, mean, smarmy, the lowest of faults. What is this puerility? Isn't it just obviously the academic attitude, where over-elaboration ends in frigid failure? Writers fall into this fault because they want to be uncommon and exquisite, and to impress everybody, and instead they founder upon the trash of affectation.」Such failures all come「from the same cause, namely, today's crazy passion for novel ideas.」

Surface marks of writing reflect the fundamental stands of individual styles, but surface marks do not constitute styles, and styles do not prescribe surface marks, even though styles can explain such marks. To Aristotle, excellence of style consists in being clear and not commonplace — this is a fundamental stand on the question of presentation. He then examines surface techniques that can help the writer to achieve clarity and distinction, and alerts us to typical errors at the surface level. Aristotle offers many examples, but the discussion of the surface in every case derives from an analysis of the base. Longinus does the same thing, walking us through a great range of surface marks appropriate to sublime style, and contrasting successful examples of the style with failed attempts, but he does not suggest that the style derives from surface marks appropriate to it.

The many such examples in classical rhetorical treatments, and the use of repeated examples as patterns on which students can model their own writing, should never be interpreted as suggesting that style consists of surface marks, or that if we imitate the surface marks, we achieve the style. This would be as foolish as imagining that by wearing the same kind of shoes as a great athlete and imitating the athlete's manner of tying the laces, we will become great athletes ourselves. Both Aristotle and Longinus recognize that without the fundamental stand, the surface marks form only a sorry and monstrous parody of the style. Neither of them would have endorsed the procedure of selecting one sentence for inspection and posing the question,「What is the style of this sentence?」For example, the sentence,「He died quietly」could occur with perfect appropriateness in a work whose style is plain, classic, romantic, contemplative, oratorical, sublime, prophetic, practical, or diplomatic. To recognize a style, one must recognize its fundamental stand on decisive questions, which will be reflected with greater or lesser skill in its level of expression.

The closest model in classical antiquity for our analysis of classic style is Longinus's analysis of「the sublime」in On the Sublime, perhaps the most brilliant treatment of a style ever written.

No reader can think that Longinus is trying to give a universal prescription for good writing; he analyzes the distinctive stand of one style, and is always aware that there are many others. Sublime style is distinct from other styles because it takes a distinct stand on the elements of style: truth, presentation, scene, cast, thought and language. Its cast, unlike the cast of classic style, does not involve a symmetric relationship between equals; its model scene is not conversation; the relationship of language to thought does not have the effect of either presentation or persuasion.「For the effect of genius is not to persuade the audience but rather to transport them out of themselves.」Sublime writing, or writing at moments when it achieves the style of sublimity, consequently has a character entirely different from that of writing whose purpose is to persuade through detailed and systematic argument, for in linear argument,「inventive skill and the due disposal and marshalling of facts gradually emerge from the whole tissue of the composition, rather than showing themselves in one or two touches: on the other hand, a well-timed flash of sublimity scatters everything before it like a bolt of lightning and reveals the full power of the speaker at a single stroke.」

Longinus situates the origin of sublime style fundamentally at the level of thought, not surface constructions: the prime and most powerful source of the sublime is「the command of full-blooded ideas.」A natural faculty of expression is of course indispensable to sublime style, but cannot provide sublime style. Longinus's view of the source of sublime style depends upon a view of the relationship between writer and reader as fundamentally asymmetric: the writer is gifted with a fabulous mind and a natural talent for expression, which we admire, and the effect of which is to transport us out of ourselves in ways that otherwise are probably not available to us.

Yet for all the asymmetry between writers of the sublime and students of this writing, Longinus offers students a curriculum that might help them cultivate a capacity for the sublime. This curriculum consists not in mastering and parroting certain surface patterns, but rather in training the mind:

Now, since the first, I mean natural genius, plays a greater part than all the others, here too, although it is rather a gift than an acquired quality, we should still do our best to train our minds into sympathy with what is noble and impregnate them again and again with high inspiration.「How?」you might ask. Well, elsewhere I have written something like this,「Sublimity is the true ring of a noble mind.」And so even without being spoken the bare idea often by itself wins admiration for its inherent genius. . . . In the first place, then, it is absolutely necessary to indicate the sources of the sublime and to show that the mind of the genuine orator must be neither small nor ignoble. For it is impossible that those whose thoughts and habits all their lives long are petty and servile should flash out anything wonderful, worthy of immortal life. No, a great style is the natural outcome of important thoughts, and sublime expressions naturally fall to people with spirit.

In the spirit of Longinus, we would like now to clarify the stand of classic style on the elements of style and to contrast classic style with a selection of other mature and consistent styles.

Classic Style Is Not Plain Style

Plain style is communal, its model scene a congregation in which speakers reaffirm for each other common truths that are the property of all. In the theology behind plain style, truth is always simple, and it is a common human possession. Individual revisions of this communal possession distort and dilute it. The wisdom of children can be the wisdom of adults, because knowing truth requires no special experience and no critical analysis. Sophisticated thought and conceptual refinement pervert truth. Any language that reaches beyond the simplest level is suspicious as the probable symptom of such a perversion. Simple language may not always be completely adequate to the expression of truth, but at least it is pure as far as it goes.

Classic style does not reject plain style, although it rejects the theology behind it and sees that theology as illegitimately elevating a necessary foundation into an achieved style. From the perspective of classic style, plain style is deficient because the theology behind plain style ignores the fact that, left to themselves, people are vulnerable to special interests and prone to special pleading. People are weak, and common wisdom is thus often self-serving. It is perfectly possible for common wisdom to be an anthology of a community's complacent errors, because common wisdom does not include any principle of critical validation. Without critical testing, common wisdom becomes received opinion.

Classic style views itself as repairing the deficiency of plain style by introducing sophistication and individual responsibility. First, classic writers and readers are an elite community, consisting of those who practice the critical discipline of its theology. Anyone can take up this practice and so join, but the style is aristocratic, not egalitarian. Second, classic wisdom cannot be the wisdom of children because it depends upon a wealth of adult experience. In plain style, everyone is equal; truth is everyone's birthright. It is seen by all; it is everyone's possession. It can come out of the mouths of babes. In classic style, truth is available to all who are willing to work to achieve it, but truth is certainly not commonly possessed by all and is no one's birthright. In the classic view, truth is the possession of individuals who have validated common wisdom; for them, truth has been achieved, and such achievement requires both experience and a critical intelligence beyond the range of babes.

Classic style remedies the deficiency of plain style by requiring the writer to stand entirely behind the thought she presents. Freshness is mandatory in classic style but freshness has nothing to do with novelty of ideas, on which classic style places no special premium. It is rather the requirement that the thinking behind the writing be the achievement of an individual. The classic writer has done the thinking, personally. Even when she accepts or uses a commonplace, she has thought it through herself and can stand behind it herself.

Classic style contains plain style concretely by incorporating it, but also by extending it, the way a Chinese ideogram contains a radical. A classic sentence is often a nuanced version of a sentence that otherwise might have been plain.「Grace is simple」is plain.「Grace, from the perspective of God, is simple」is classic, as is「The machinery of grace is always simple.」Plain style values simplicity but shuns nuance. Classic style values both simplicity and nuance.「The truth is pure and simple」is plain.「The truth is rarely pure, and never simple」is classic.「Seeing is believing」is plain.「Seeing is believing only if you don't see too clearly」is classic.

Classic Style Is Not Reflexive Style

In the classic stand on presentation, writing is a perfectly transparent window through which a subject is presented; the ability of the writer and the sufficiency of the language to serve this presentation are never in doubt.

This fundamental stand opposes classic style irreconcilably to an entire family of styles in which the writing itself shares a focus with any other possible subject, and the difficulties of the writing are brought to the reader's attention.

Classic writing can present anything, but even when the subject presented is writing itself, the focus is not shared. La Bruyère talks about the conditions of good writing when he says,「It is necessary to express what is true in order to write naturally, powerfully, sensitively,」but he does not call attention to his own writing as he is doing so. When Alexander Pope criticizes bad verse in An Essay on Criticism, the writing itself imitates the faults he discusses, becoming a focus of the reader's attention:「And ten low Words oft creep in one dull Line.」Classic style is a performance style, and while classic writers can be skeptical about anything else, they cannot be skeptical about their own ability to perform when they are in the act of performing. The classic writer assumes that his subject can be known and can be expressed without distortion. These are enabling conventions of the style. The classic writer is not necessarily free of doubts about his enterprise, but as a performer he must appear to be. An acrobat, a concert pianist, an actor cannot simultaneously perform and question the possibility of performing. Classic style is a style for performance, not a style for questioning its own competence.

When we open a cookbook, we completely put aside — and expect the author to put aside — the kind of question that leads to the heart of certain philosophic and religious traditions. Is it possible to talk about cooking? Do eggs really exist? Is food something about which knowledge is possible? Can anyone else ever tell us anything true about cooking? These questions may lead to enlightenment or to satori; they do not lead to satisfying dinners. Readers of cookbooks expect to see cooking treated directly, as if such metaphysical and epistemological questions could never be entertained by anyone, even though we know they can be and have been entertained by saints and sages. We do not expect the writer to be immobilized by preliminary discussions of whether it is possible to talk about「cooking,」if such a thing even exists. Classic style similarly puts aside as inappropriate philosophical questions about its enterprise. If it took those questions up, it could never get around to treating its subject, and its purpose is exclusively to treat its subject.

Raising skeptical doubts about the writer's own enterprise is a feature of nonclassic self-conscious styles. In such styles, the writer's chief, if unstated, concern is to escape being convicted of philosophical naïveté about his own enterprise. Such a writer is careful to gesture periodically toward the contingent frame of his own discourse, to disclaim any belief that his writing can treat any subject directly. The style stays in the foreground, inextricably mingled with its announced subject. It is marked with formulaic hedges concerning the possibility of knowledge, the contingency of knowledge, and the ability of language to express knowledge.「Impotence principles」such as the doctrine that discourse can never be about anything except itself share the focus of the writer's attention with any possible subject.

Classic prose does not discuss doubts or fears about its own enterprise, not because it is naïve, but because it has chosen something incompatible with reflexive inquiry. We can question the possibility of acting or we can act, but we cannot do both at once. Classic writers make an unspoken choice: they act. Rather than discuss the possibility of action, they put that possibility to the test, and let the reader be the judge.

Clifford Geertz, in Works and Lives: The Anthropologist as Author, quotes an example of such a self-referential and self-questioning style from the introduction,「Self and Other,」to Loring Danforth's The Death Rituals of Rural Greece:

Anthropology inevitably involves an encounter with the Other. All too often, however, the ethnographic distance that separates the reader of anthropological texts and the anthropologist himself from the Other is rigidly maintained and at times even artificially exaggerated. In many cases this distancing leads to an exclusive focus on the Other as primitive, bizarre, and exotic. The gap between a familiar「we」and an exotic「they」is a major obstacle to a meaningful understanding of the Other, an obstacle that can only be overcome through some form of participation in the world of the Other.

Geertz comments:

The brooding note of Loring Danforth's「Introduction」(Who am I to be saying these things, by what right, and to what purpose, and how on earth can I manage honestly to say them?) is one now very widely heard, in various forms and with various intensities.

Clifford Geertz, an acute observer of style, calls attention here to one mark of reflexive style. Reflexive styles might consider classic style to be naïve or philistine; but there is nothing naïve in a tacit acceptance of incongruities in the nature of writing and nothing philistine in making unhedged choices.

Classic Style Is Not Practical Style

In the model scene behind practical style, the reader has a problem to solve, a decision to make, a ruling to hand down, an inquiry to conduct, a machine to design or repair — in short, a job to do. The reader's need, not the writer's desire to articulate something, initiates the writing. The writer's job is to serve the reader's immediate need by delivering timely materials. The motive can thus be almost anything productive of a need: greed, enterprise, competition, philanthropy. Since the reader is engaged in solving a problem, the reading is not an end in itself, it is instrumental to some other end. That is why, in this scene, the prime stylistic virtue is ease of parsing. In practical style, the best presentation will allow the reader to acquire timely information with a minimum of distraction because, in this scene, writing is an instrument for delivering information with maximum efficiency and in such a way as to place the smallest possible burden upon the reader, who has other — more important — burdens to bear.

In classic style, by contrast, neither writer nor reader has a job, the writing and reading do not serve a practical goal, and the writer has all the time in the world to present her subject as something interesting for its own sake. Her characteristic brevity comes from the elegance of her mind, never from pressures of time or employment. The writing is initiated by the writer, not the reader: the writer wants to present something not to a client, but to an indefinite audience, treated as if it were a single individual. Her motive is to present truth, not so that someone can use it to accomplish a practical goal, although someone might make use of it for such a purpose, but for its own sake.

Classic style and practical style have important areas of overlap; both styles place a high value on clarity and directness. Classic style values clarity because it sees itself as a transparent medium for the presentation of truth. Practical style values clarity because it places a premium on being easy to parse. Both styles can be described as precise and efficient, but for quite different reasons: practical style is precise and efficient because the reader wants to understand well and quickly for the purpose of making immediate use of what he is reading; classic style is precise and efficient because precision serves truth and because efficiency is a refinement. The efficiency of classic style is a sign of its having the leisure and luxury to afford refinement: the writer and reader have had all the time needed to train their minds to the requisite concert pitch.

Neither classic style nor practical style contains much of the sort of internal network of cross-references that linguists call「metadiscourse」(「I would like to tell you about X but first I have to tell you about y」). In classic style, such explicit acknowledgment of planning defeats the immediacy and spontaneity that mark the style's model scene, conversation. In practical style, a network of cross-references, clotting the text, is a poor substitute for less distracting indications of coherence.

There are a few recognizable prototypes of the model scene of practical style. The first, drawn from the world of corporate business or the legal profession, is a memorandum to a superior who has asked for information. The writer knows more about the subject than the reader, but it is the reader who will make a decision or take action, and so stands in need of some of the writer's knowledge. The reader's need is the motive for writing. A second prototype is a memorandum to a subordinate whose activities the superior is trying to direct and manage. In neither case does the reader want or expect to know everything the writer knows about the subject. Practical style is selective in a way that classic style is not. The cast is hierarchical, not symmetric. Clustered around these prototypes are recognizable extensions: the manual telling someone how to perform routine jobs; the manual telling someone how to use something; the how-to book instructing the CEO in the art of negotiation; the book about financial planning telling those with discretionary income how to invest it; the advisory from a manufacturer to owners of the manufactured product telling them that it has a defect and how to get it fixed.

Another prototype of this scene is the delivery of the results of research to fellow researchers, which is to say, fellow insiders. The writer knows more about his own research than the readers do, but they are fellow professionals who expect to know everything he knows as a result of reading his report, or know at least what they need to know for their own purposes. What is reported will affect their own independent activities in ways that they alone can judge. The writer is imparting information and does not want his writing, as such, to be noticed; it should fulfill every standard expectation and be as easy to parse as possible.

Most writing in schools and colleges is a perversion of practical style: the student pretends that he is writing a memorandum. He pretends that he knows more than the reader, that the reader needs this information, and that his job is to impart that information in a way that is easy for the reader to parse. This pretense is supposed to be practice for the real thing. Actually, the reader (the teacher) probably knows much more about the subject than the writer; the reader (the teacher) has no need whatever for the information; and the job of the writer is to cover himself from attack by his superior (the teacher). The actual scene interferes so much with the fantasy scene that the result is almost inevitably compromised, if not fraudulent.

The best-known teachers of practical style are Strunk and White, in their ubiquitous Elements of Style. The best teachers of practical style are Joseph Williams and Gregory Colomb, in Williams's Style: Toward Clarity and Grace and a series of academic articles and technical reports.

Strunk and White's disarming treatment of what everybody really needs to know about writing has been treasured by generations of people who are occasionally forced to write something and view the prospect with a sinking feeling of dread. As a guide to writing, The Elements of Style, being little more than an apparently arbitrary mixture of grammatical digest, handy list of common mistakes, and expert hand-holding, is drastically incomplete, but it is a masterpiece of psychological insight. Its attractions derive, we suspect, first, from its implicit, cheery, and optimistic promise that if you just read its few pages and work those few surface tricks it teaches you (「In summaries, keep to one tense,」「less should not be used for fewer」), you will not embarrass yourself; second, from its exhortatory cheerleading that seems so assured and upbeat; and third, from its tone of common sense that masks, at key points, an essential vacuousness:「Choose a suitable design and hold to it.」

Such advice has the same immemorial power of「Just use your head, and you'll be all right.」Advice of this sort has the great merit of being brief and supportive. There is a welcome assurance that there is really nothing to it, except for those truly mysterious aspects of the subject that cannot be taught at all.「I can teach you where to put a comma in ten minutes, but don't expect me to teach you to write like Shakespeare.」

Williams and Colomb present an incomparably deeper and more orderly treatment of practical style. The style they present is consistent and mature; it makes decisions about all the major questions that define a style, and is fully developed. The claim behind Williams and Colomb's treatment is large and theoretical: just as readers of an English sentence have expectations about word order and the distribution of information in a sentence, so readers of what Williams and Colomb call「pointed texts」have in their minds a grammar of such texts that tells them where to look for what. Readers will use that grammar. Writing that conforms to it will be easy for the reader to follow. Writing that resists it will be difficult for the reader to follow. For example, a reader looks for an opening section (「the issue」) and a following section (「the discussion」) within each unit of a pointed text. He looks for a rich lexical field, at the end of the issue, which will be used to weave the discussion together, to give it cohesion, as it progresses. He looks for a point at the end of the discussion. If there is a point at the end of the issue, it will be taken to be an adumbration of the point at the end of the discussion. Units of discourse nest, so that units within the discussion will themselves be composed of an issue and a discussion. These principles work themselves down to the level of the sentence, where the reader expects the first part of the sentence to present an issue (topic) and the second part of the sentence to present a discussion (comment). The reader expects old information in the sentence before new. The reader prefers to understand things in terms of actions and agents, so the backbone of a sentence should be a verb that conveys action, and the subject of such a verb should be one of the agents — perhaps metaphorical — in this action-story. Since readers link agents to actions in pairs, writers should try not to separate the subject (agent) from the verb (action) with distracting information. And so on.

Williams and Colomb's finely detailed treatment of practical style provides an indispensable guide impressive in its scope and intelligence. It is missing just one thing, namely, an explicit acknowledgment of its fundamental stand, and an acknowledgment that its fundamental stand is one of many alternatives. While their work is thorough, systematic, and theoretically sophisticated, and while they know that they are dealing with just one style, the work is misleading in its self-presentation: it pretends that the style it concerns, and about which it gives excellent advice, is universal and exclusive rather than merely ubiquitous. Practical style rests on a set of answers to basic questions; other styles rest on different answers to those same questions.

Practical style comes from deciding that what matters in style is the reader, and in particular the reader's ease in parsing features of the text, especially the discourse features of the text. Practical style is so firm in this decision that it treats it as no decision at all, but as a necessity: of course excellence of style consists in conforming to the reader's grammatical expectations in the act of reading. Why else would anyone presume to take up a reader's time than to solve a problem for the reader? Why then would anyone write except to inform the reader about a solution to that problem? How else can this be done aside from ordering the text so that readers can get the point before giving up in the face of the obvious difficulty? Williams and Colomb accordingly coach their students in a style of writing assimilated to a model of reading.

Classic style makes similar pretenses in adopting the rather different stand that the writer counts equally with the reader, that both are fully engaged by the subject, competent, and alert, that of course the reader will be interested in what the writer has to say, and that of course the reader will recognize truth once it has been clearly presented.

In the model scene of practical style, readers and writers hold standard job slots in existing institutions. The reader has no leisure and does not want surprises; the reader reads not for personal reasons but to accomplish a job. Accomplishing the job depends upon the communication of information, and practical style serves the purpose of keeping the information flowing efficiently through institutions. Since students will go on to such employment, they must be trained to write in practical style. The writer is not an individual writing to another individual but a job description writing to another job description. There is a job to do and practical style is the appropriate tool for doing it: the style is thus fundamentally optimistic, pragmatic, and utilitarian. The motive is the job; eternal and noncontingent truth is irrelevant except as it bears upon the performance of the job — even then its eternal and noncontingent nature is beside the point.

There is a surface mark of practical style as presented by Williams and Colomb that derives from its fundamental stand and distinguishes it sharply from classic style. If the reader always expects to find certain kinds of things in certain「discourse locations,」and the writer submits uniformly to those expectations, then the style permits skimming, because the cream is always in the same place. This can be highly useful in certain practical situations: if you are sitting at a desk and need to plow through forty-three memos, most of whose substance you already know, it will be a great help if you can rely upon the memos to present their main points in the expected places; then you can simply glance through and extract what you want.

If you try to skim classic writing in this way, you run the risk of missing indispensable conceptual nuances or refinements. In the model scene of classic style, the classic reader is not pressed for time, distracted by jobs to do, or mired in routine. The classic reader is competent, sophisticated, quite able to handle surprises, and unimpressed with predictability. The surface mark of classic style that is most uncongenial to practical style can be picked out by what we will call the「last-third」test: once you have progressed a little way into a piece of writing, block out the last third of each sentence as you come to it, and imagine the standard things you might expect to occupy that position, based on what you have already read. If what in fact does occupy that position is routinely one of those standard and expected things, then the piece may be a paragon of practical writing but is unlikely to be classic. This is not because classic sentences reverse themselves at the end: once you see the end of a classic sentence, you will recognize that the sentence was true to its direction, but that does not make the sentence predictable, because it usually contains a conceptual refinement that is clear and simple as the truth but not a cliché and hence not predictable. Here are four passages that pass the last-third test beautifully; none of them is likely to occur in practical style:

Although a dirty campaign was widely predicted, for the most part the politicians contented themselves with insults and lies. (Julian Barnes on the 1992 British parliamentary elections)

With peer pressure and whippings at school and at home, we were soon completely socialized and as happy as children anywhere. (Ruth Baer Lambach)

In the same year [1827] the United Kingdom, Russia and France decided to intervene to enforce an armistice「without however taking any part in the hostilities.」The allied fleet went to parley with the Turkish fleet anchored in Navarino Bay (Pylos) and ended up destroying it. (Greece [Michelin Green Guide])

It is from this weighing of delights against their cost that the student eater (particularly if he is a student at the University of Paris) erects the scale of values that will serve him until he dies or has to reside in the Middle West for a long period. (A. J. Liebling)

Classic Style Is Not Contemplative Style

Classic style implicitly defines itself as a normal, practically inevitable, perspective. It makes continual if tacit claims to transparency; it does not interpret; it merely presents. These claims are, of course, false. When the style succeeds, it simply obscures the distinction and manages to pass off interpretation as presentation.

In contemplative style, the distinction between presentation and interpretation is always observed: the writer sees something, presents it to the reader, and then interprets it. The stress is on the interpretation, but the transition is always explicitly marked. E. B. White, a master of the contemplative essay, characteristically observes this sequence, as he does in「The Ring of Time,」a dazzling piece of writing that is entirely unclassic. White describes himself casually observing a practice session of a circus, watching the lion tamer, a big, brown horse, and then a circus rider. He tells the reader precisely what he sees and how he sees it:「As she emerged in front of us, I saw that she was barefoot, her dirty little feet fighting the uneven ground. In most respects she was like any of two or three dozen showgirls you encounter if you wander about the winter quarters of Mr. John Ringling North's circus, in Sarasota — cleverly proportioned, deeply browned by the sun, dusty, eager, and almost naked.」White describes what he sees and what anyone there with him might see. And then he contemplates what he sees and offers an interpretation:「I became painfully conscious of the element of time. Everything in the hideous old building seemed to take the shape of a circle, conforming to the course of the horse. The rider's gaze, as she peered straight ahead, seemed to be circular, as though bent by force of circumstance; then time itself began running in circles, and so the beginning was where the end was, and the two were the same, and one thing ran into the next and time went round and around and got nowhere.」He then sees that the girl is deluded:「She is at that enviable moment in life [I thought] when she believes she can go once around the ring, make one complete circuit, and at the end be exactly the same age as at the start.」The associations, the connections, the very way he turns a commonplace event into an allegory of time belong to him alone; contemplative style assumes that this is not what someone standing next to him would see. In contemplative style, the focus is on the interpretation and not on the event.

White stands in a tradition of American preachers who present a text and then interpret it. The common scene that White sees becomes, through his contemplation of it, an allegory of the world, which the reader is allowed to see because White offers his superior vision. He begins to discuss things that in principle the reader has no way of checking, and he does not hesitate to refer to himself as something like an authority.「The circus comes as close to being the world in microcosm as anything I know; in a way, it puts all the rest of show business in the shade. Its magic is universal and complex. Out of its wild disorder comes order; from its rank smell rises the good aroma of courage and daring; out of its preliminary shabbiness comes the final splendor.」The asymmetry between writer and reader is profound. White takes the attitude that the reader could be perfectly competent and yet, in looking at this scene, see none of what he sees.

The first fundamental distinction between classic style and contemplative style is thus that classic style presents something but contemplative style presents an interpretation of something. This entails many different decisions concerning truth, presentation, cast, and scene.

The second fundamental distinction between classic style and contemplative style has to do with thought and language. Classic language is an instrument for presenting the product of thought according to the order of reason, not according to the sequence of experience. In contemplative style, writing is itself the engine of discovery: the writing is a record of the process of the writer's thinking, quite independent of its relation to the order of reason. In contemplative style, the touchstone of the writing is the process of the writer's contemplation. That process and the writer's engagement in it often become an explicit subject of the writing:

In attempting to recapture this mild spectacle, I am merely acting as recording secretary for one of the oldest of societies — the society of those who, at one time or another, have surrendered, without even a show of resistance, to the bedazzlement of a circus rider. As a writing man, or secretary, I have always felt charged with the safekeeping of all unexpected items of worldly or unworldly enchantment, as though I might be held personally responsible if even a small one were to be lost. . . . The ten-minute ride the girl took achieved — as far as I was concerned, who wasn't looking for it, and quite unbeknownst to her, who wasn't even striving for it — the thing that is sought by performers everywhere. . . . As I watched with the others, our jaws adroop, our eyes alight, I became painfully conscious of the element of time. . . . i thought:「She will never be as beautiful as this again」 — a thought that made me acutely unhappy — and in a flash my mind (which is too much of a busybody to suit me) had projected her twenty-five years ahead.

Rather than presenting truth, White often quotes his own contemplation, giving its history:

「She is at that enviable moment in life [I thought] when she believes she can go once around the ring, make one complete circuit, and at the end be exactly the same age as at the start.」. . . And then I slipped back into my trance, and time was circular again — time, pausing quietly with the rest of us, so as not to disturb the balance of a performer.

In these passages, White uses many of the surface marks of clarity, precision, and accurate vocabulary that are associated with classic style. But his fundamental stand on the elements of style is very far from the classic stand. Regardless of language or phrasing, none of these passages could fit comfortably in a classic text.

Because contemplation is a superior achievement by a superior individual who talks about the difficulties of contemplation, contemplative style splits into two modes that are not incompatible and that can be used alternately. Sometimes, the contemplative writer succeeds fully in his achievement: thought and language can be adequate. Thoreau frequently writes as if he has been successful in his contemplations. But sometimes, the contemplative writer fails in his achievement, and feels compelled to settle for what is merely his best effort. White often does this, as when he writes,「But it is not easy to communicate anything of this nature.」

At other moments, White seems to take the extreme stand that language is always inadequate to the task:「It has been ambitious and plucky of me to attempt to describe what is indescribable, and I have failed, as I knew i would. But I have discharged my duty to my society; and besides, a writer, like an acrobat, must occasionally try a stunt that is too much for him.」

Classic Style Is Not Romantic Style

Contemplative style is fundamentally about the writer's thought and often explicitly acknowledges this focus. Romantic style, although not necessarily focused on the writer's thought in the sense of his analysis or reflection, is always and inescapably about the writer. Romantic prose is a mirror, not a window.

Romantic style does not separate thought from sensation, memory, and emotion. All these things together are experience. Neither does romantic style distinguish the person who experiences from the experience. The romantic writer therefore cannot be an observer who sees something separate from himself; both the writer and his experience are inseparable elements of a perpetual dialectic in which the writer creates a world, which in its turn creates him. This process is something like the pulse of life. A writer can describe this dynamic relationship, but cannot「present」it and allow it to be verified.

If contemplative style views writing as an engine of discovery, romantic style looks upon it as an act of creation that both comes from the self and reveals the self.

The narrator of Proust's A la recherche du temps perdu offers a striking description of such an act of romantic creation in his account of his first direct encounter with the Duchesse de Guermantes, a woman who had a large place in his imagination before he had ever seen her. The image he cherished has little to do with her — no one but the narrator himself could validate it in a face-to-face encounter with her — but it reveals a great deal about the narrator:

My disappointment was immense. It arose from my not having borne in mind, when I thought of Mme de Guermantes, that I was picturing her to myself in the colours of a tapestry or a stained-glass window, as living in another century, as being of another substance than the rest of the human race.

At this point, there is a kind of struggle between the classic outlook and the romantic.

. . . I was endeavouring to apply . . . to this fresh and unchanging image, the idea:「It's Mme de Guermantes」; but I succeeded only in making the idea pass between me and the image, as though they were two discs moving in separate planes with a space between.

The Madame de Guermantes whose existence is independent of the narrator's idea of her does not, however, overcome the Madame de Guermantes who is a defining element of his mentality. He says these words to himself silently but distinctly:

「Great and glorious before the days of Charlemagne, the Guermantes had the right of life and death over their vassals; the Duchesse de Guermantes descends from Geneviève de Brabant. She does not know, nor would she consent to know, any of the people who are here to-day.」

His struggle ends with a creative act that allows the narrator to see the romantic truth, one unique to himself, one that could not be shared by anyone else present on the occasion he describes.

. . . my eyes resting upon her fair hair, her blue eyes, the lines of her neck, and overlooking the features which might have reminded me of the faces of other women, I cried out within myself, as I admired this deliberately unfinished sketch:「How lovely she is! What true nobility! It is indeed a proud Guermantes, the descendant of Geneviève de Brabant, that I have before me!」

In contemplative style, which preserves a distinction between observation and the observer's reflections, it is possible to discover something that is outside of the self and not dependent on the writer for its existence. In romantic style, which observes no such distinction, creation replaces discovery and always depends on the writer for its existence.

Classic writing may present personal material as an instance of a more general truth, but it never presents something that is merely personal or in principle private. For romantic style to rule out personal experience or even experience that is in principle private would reduce the romantic writer to silence. In the theology of this style, the only things anyone can know are personal and in principle private.

Classic style never leaves the writer feeling incomplete, unfulfilled, or incompetent. Classic writers can know something, and once they know it, they can say it. Correction and revision are not infinite, because classic style is a craft that can effectively be learned by learning its parts, none of which is idiosyncratic. Thought and language fit, so it is possible to succeed completely in expressing truth. In romantic style, to separate thought and expression or thought and thinker as separate and fixed realities is to make a false division that leads to false conclusions. In the romantic perspective, writing is not a craft that can be learned, because it is an activity co-extensive with the writer's person; it cannot be reduced to discrete modules, separate writing jobs that can be completed one after another. There is no complete fit between thought and language because a writer's thought is not a formed and fixed reality independent of language and capable of being fitted into it.

It is a premise of classic style that truth has been perfectly perceived by the writer. The writer's problem is to articulate that truth perfectly, and in the theology of classic style this problem always has a solution. In romantic style, the writer can know truth romantically and whole, but truth cannot be conceived analytically without a loss of definition, and cannot be put into language without a further loss of definition. In classic style, truth is allied with clarity. In romantic style, clarity can be achieved only at the price of falsification.

Both the classic writer and the romantic writer are vulnerable but in entirely different ways. The classic writer is vulnerable because he speaks noncontingent truth to which everybody is vulnerable. The romantic writer is vulnerable because everybody is vulnerable to the conditions of life. The classic writer is always vulnerable to challenge; the romantic writer never. When the romantic writer says he dreams of Jeanie with the light brown hair, he yearns for her, he sighs for her, who can check to see whether it is true? He cannot be told he is wrong, for he stands in a special place, with incorrigible knowledge about his entirely private and personal subject matter. If he is wrong, his error is built into the human condition, so no human being can correct him. But the classic writer can be told that he is wrong, because the truth he presents is available to everyone, and can be tested by anyone.

Of the styles we have discussed, classic and romantic are furthest apart: they take strong fundamentally irreconcilable stands on every one of the elements of style. The distinction between them is as absolute as the distinction Demetrius saw between the restrained and the elevated. The classic stand on the elements of style is not always opposed in all particulars to the stands of other styles. Between classic style and practical style is an agreement that language is sufficient to express knowable truths. Between classic style and contemplative style is at least a channel for discussion: at least sometimes, truth can be known and language can express it. Between classic style and plain style is a gradient of conceptual refinement. But classic style and romantic style represent irreconcilable conceptual stands. There is no common ground between them, no gradient from one to the other; instead there is something like a permanent and impassable divide.

Classic Style Is Not Prophetic Style

Despite a shared affinity for unqualified assertion, classic style has little in common with prophetic or oracular style because prophetic style cannot place the reader where the writer is. The reader cannot verify through his own experience what the writer experiences. Classic style does not depend upon powers that are divine or that are available only to special people, or powers whose availability is subject to some agency that human beings do not control or understand. Prophetic style, on the other hand, depends entirely upon such powers. The ability of the prophetic writer to know truth has come through powers that are not part of the usual human complement. Even their possessor does not possess them reliably: these powers come and go in ways that he does not understand or control.

In Western culture, the best-known examples of prophetic style are in the Old Testament. When the sons of Jesse come before Samuel, the eldest, Eliab, makes an immediate impression on the aging judge, who concludes,「Here, before the Lord, is his anointed king.」It is a response that stands for human insight and wisdom; it is the judgment of a wise and experienced person. Any reader who knows what Samuel knows would presumably share his view of Eliab. But in the model scene of the prophetic style, human judgment does not and cannot share the sacred perspective, even though it can, through a privileged channel, receive the fruit of divine wisdom. The Lord responds to Samuel:「Take no account of it if he is handsome and tall; I reject him. The Lord does not see as man sees; men judge by appearances but the Lord judges by the heart.」

One of the most famous representations of the model scene of prophetic style occurs in the opening chapter of the Book of Jeremiah. The passage begins with the archetypical claim of the prophetic writer, that he is not speaking in his own voice and not conveying his own judgments.「The Word of the Lord came to me.」It then passes on to a dialogue between the Word of God and the inarticulate Jeremiah.

「Before I formed you in the womb . . . I appointed you a prophet to the nations.」

「Ah! Lord God,」I answered,「I do not know how to speak; I am only a child.」. . . Then the Lord stretched out his hand and touched my mouth, and said to me,「I put my words into your mouth. This day I give you authority over nations and over kingdoms, to pull down and to uproot, to destroy and to demolish, to build and to plant.」

The equally famous representation of the calling of Isaiah establishes the same points although they run the risk of being lost in the fabulous vision in which they are embedded. The prophet inexplicably finds himself in the realm of the divine, where he does not belong. (「Woe is me! I am lost, for I am a man of unclean lips. . . .」) But his deficiency is miraculously removed and「unclean lips」are made capable of speaking divine words. He volunteers his services as a messenger and receives his commission:「Go and tell this people. . . .」

The poet, painter, engraver, and printer William Blake is one of the few widely admired modern writers to make extensive use of prophetic style in something like its prototypical form. But prophetic style is not confined to the sacred literature of ancient Israel or an occasional genius-crackpot like Blake. It has its modern form on all those occasions in which a writer claims to be a channel for impersonal and normally inaccessible truth. The writer makes claims to authority, but not his own authority and not the kind of authority that is available to others.「History tells us」(and, tacitly,「I am history's spokesman」) is a common anthem of politicians and of those mysterious channels of wisdom who write opinion columns in newspapers; prophetic style is used by jurists who on occasion claim to speak the judgment of principles or of long-dead foundation jurists; it is the style of all those innumerable spokesmen who tell us what「tradition,」「common sense,」or「common decency」demand and of those slightly less numerous spokesmen who tell us what fashions state or what eras or epochs tell us.

Classic Style Is Not Oratorical Style

The central model for most discussions of rhetoric in classical antiquity seems to be oratory. Even when something is written — rather than spoken — in an oratorical style and meant to be read silently by one individual, its effects are meant for the ear. The text may be written down formally in sentences, but its units are periods and are defined by sound.

The model scene of oratorical style is neither casual nor spontaneous. Its prototypical occasion is the assembly of a group of people faced by a public problem — like military invasion, the forming and maintenance of public values, or the judging of social offenders.

This scene creates a cast. Leadership is necessary, and the assembly's job is to respond to a candidate who puts himself forward. The orator assumes a role as leader of both the public moment and the setting of policy. He invites the audience to yield to his rhythms and to his views, which he typically presents as a version of common verities. The audience may coalesce and perhaps join in as his chorus, or remain splintered and perhaps heckle him randomly. The successful orator molds the audience into one body with one voice and one governing view. To the outsider, he may appear to be alternatively a demagogue with an echo or the selfless conductor of the common music.

In a slight variant of this model scene and cast, the audience has as its head a judge or perhaps a king who rules on policy under advice from the full audience. When Odysseus debates with Akhilleus over the best time for the Akhaians to engage the Trojans on the field of war, the judge is High King Agamemnon, but the entire council is the audience with Agamemnon at its head. Akhilleus, who wants to avenge immediately the slaying of Patroclos, vents his anger and represents his singularity:

Let us recover joy of battle soon, that's all!

No need to dither here and lose our time,

our great work still undone. When each man sees

Akhilleus in a charge, crumpling the ranks

of Trojans with his bronze-shod spear, let each

remember that is the way to fight his man!

Odysseus, by far the better orator, isolates Akhilleus by assuming for himself the role of defender and spokesman of the audience, thereby making it natural for the audience to identify with him and his views:

Brave as you are, and like a god in looks,

Akhilleus, do not send Akhaian soldiers

into the fight unfed! Today's mêlée

will not be brief, when rank meets rank, and heaven

breathes fighting spirit into both contenders.

No, tell all troops who are near the ships to take

roast meat and wine, for heart and staying power.

No soldier can fight hand to hand, in hunger,

all day long until the sun goes down!

Though in his heart he yearns for war, his legs

go slack before he knows it: thirst and famine

search him out, and his knees fail as he moves.

But that man stayed with victualing and wine

can fight his enemies all day: his heart

is bold and happy in his chest, his legs

hold out until both sides break off the battle!

Come, then, dismiss the ranks to make their breakfast.

Since oratory is designed to unite many listeners, whose attention may flag, it cannot be either very flexible or very subtle. Nuance is always risky with such an audience. Consequently, the surface of oratory usually looks like a few points with the help of a lot of music. Going along with the music helps the audience go along with the points, as Kenneth Burke has remarked in A Rhetoric of Motives:

[W]e know that many purely formal patterns can readily awaken an attitude of collaborative expectancy in us. For instance, imagine a passage built about a set of oppositions (「we do this, but they on the other hand do that; we stay here; but they go there; we look up, but they look down,」etc.) Once you grasp the trend of the form, it invites participation regardless of the subject matter. Formally, you will find yourself swinging along with the succession of antitheses, even though you may not agree with the proposition that is being presented in this form. Or it may even be an opponent's proposition which you resent — yet for the duration of the statement itself you might「help him out」to the extent of yielding to the formal development, surrendering to its symmetry as such. Of course, the more violent your original resistance to the proposition, the weaker will be your degree of「surrender」by「collaborating」with the form. But in cases where a decision is still to be reached, a yielding to the form prepares for assent to the matter identified with it. Thus, you are drawn to the form, not in your capacity as a partisan, but because of some「universal」appeal in it. And this attitude of assent may then be transferred to the matter which happens to be associated with the form.

Burke, in writing this passage, surely had in mind Pericles' Funeral Oration, as reconstructed by Thucydides, in which Pericles attempts to guide the Athenians at a difficult historical moment in their sense of communal values by offering them an image of themselves that just happens coincidentally to serve Pericles' own purposes. In this oration, which takes place at the end of the first year of the Peloponnesian War, Pericles follows the model of Odysseus in the debate with Akhilleus. Like Odysseus, Pericles casts himself in the role of spokesman for the audience. His oration has as its most central and famous parts a series of explicit and implicit contrasts between the Athenians and citizens of rival cities:

Our love of what is beautiful does not lead to extravagance; our love of the things of the mind does not make us soft. We regard wealth as something to be properly used, rather than as something to boast about. As for poverty, no one need be ashamed to admit it: the real shame is not taking practical measures to escape from it. Here each individual is interested not only in his own affairs but in the affairs of the state as well. . . . We are capable at the same time of taking risks and of estimating them beforehand. Others are brave out of ignorance; and, when they stop to think, they begin to fear. But the man who can most truly be accounted brave is he who best knows the meaning of what is sweet in life and of what is terrible, and then goes out undeterred to meet what is to come.

Later, after the plague and the second invasion of Athenian land by the Peloponnesians, the Athenians grow angry at Pericles. To defuse their anger, he summons them to Assembly and revives the oratorical theme of the previous Funeral Oration:

No doubt all this will be disparaged by people who are politically apathetic; but those who, like us, prefer a life of action will try to imitate us, and, if they fail to secure what we have secured, they will envy us. All who have taken it upon themselves to rule over others have incurred hatred and unpopularity for a time; but if one has a great aim to pursue, this burden of envy must be accepted, and it is wise to accept it. Hatred does not last for long; but the brilliance of the present is the glory of the future stored up for ever in the memory of man. It is for you. . . . Do not send embassies to Sparta: do not give the impression that you are bowed down under your present sufferings! To face calamity with a mind as unclouded as may be, and quickly to react against it — that, in a city and in an individual, is real strength.

The contrasts between oratorical style and classic style can be illustrated right from this text of Thucydides. He comments on Pericles' oratory in a style whose impulses served as a prototype for the inventors of classic style:

In this way Pericles attempted to stop the Athenians from being angry with him and to guide their thoughts in a direction away from their immediate sufferings. So far as public policy was concerned, they accepted his argument, sending no more embassies to Sparta and showing an increased energy in carrying on the war; yet as private individuals they still felt the weight of their misfortunes. The mass of the people had had little enough to start with and had now been deprived of even that; the richer classes had lost their fine estates with their rich and well-equipped houses in the country, and, which was the worst thing of all, they were at war instead of living in peace. In fact, the general ill feeling against Pericles persisted, and was not satisfied until they had condemned him to pay a fine. Not long afterwards, however, as is the way with crowds, they re-elected him to the generalship and put all their affairs into his hands. By that time people felt their own private sufferings rather less acutely and, so far as the general needs of the state were concerned, they regarded Pericles as the best man they had. . . . He survived the outbreak of war by two years and six months, and after his death his foresight with regard to the war became even more evident. For Pericles had said that Athens would be victorious if she bided her time and took care of her navy, if she avoided trying to add to the empire during the course of the war, and if she did nothing to risk the safety of the city itself. But his successors did the exact opposite, and in other matters which apparently had no connection with the war private ambition and private profit led to policies which were bad both for the Athenians themselves and for their allies.

The roles adopted by Pericles the orator and Thucydides the classic writer differ sharply. Pericles leads a group but Thucydides merely presents something to the reader. Pericles is interested but Thucydides disinterested. Pericles is the conductor of the rhythm of the crowd but Thucydides is merely talking in his natural voice. Pericles wants something from his audience but Thucydides does not. Pericles asserts and advises but Thucydides merely observes. Pericles is formal, Thucydides casual. Pericles speaks in a public occasion but Thucydides is telling the reader something spontaneously. Pericles affirms common wisdom, but Thucydides operates at all moments as an independent thinker. Pericles expects his audience to notice his oratory while Thucydides pretends that his prose is transparent. Pericles asks his audience to look harder to see what needs seeing, while Thucydides is simply pointing out something that is obvious once presented. Of course, in fact, Thucydides' supposed historical account is a relentless argument about the nature of crowds and democracies, but he presents his conclusions the same way one might point out the first turning of the leaves in fall, as a fact, although a subtle fact. It is a characteristic strength of classic style to persuade by default. The classic writer offers no explicit argument at all. Ostensibly, he offers simply a presentation. If the reader fails to recognize that the ostensible presentation is a device of persuasion, then he is persuaded without ever realizing that an argument has occurred. It is always easier to persuade an audience unaware of the rhetorician's agenda.

The differences between the oratorical and classic models of speech are considerable because oratory and the writing styles based on it have a lot of practical work to do. These oratorical styles cannot concern themselves with thought exclusively or even mainly. They have not merely to keep an audience made up of many individuals attentive and alert but also to take a heterogeneous group of individuals and mold them into a unified body directed at action or the making of policy for action. They make use of what the audience already thinks much more than they introduce new observations or refine old ones.

### 1.6 Trade Secrets

Classic writers almost never discuss the classic stand on the elements of style, not because they want to keep secrets but rather because they take the classic stand to be obvious, needing neither explanation nor justification. But they have no axiomatic prejudice against investigating the classic stand, and there are classic works, such as Descartes's Discourse on Method, that explicitly lay out many of the principles behind it.

These principles constitute what we have called the theology behind the classic stand. The theology is acknowledged even if rarely discussed. But separate from the theology are a few trade secrets, acknowledged neither in the theology nor in the style. The theology can be learned by anyone, but only a classic writer is likely to come to an understanding of how the trade secrets of the style are related to its theology. There are two principal trade secrets: classic style's practical limitations and the ultimate incoherence of its theoretical perspective.

Classic Style Is Inadequate

There are theorems in mathematics — such as Gödel's Incompleteness Theorem, the Fundamental Theorem of Galois Theory, and Wedderburn's Theorem (「A finite division ring is a field」) — that count as high art because of their elegance and purity. Their proofs move deftly and efficiently in clear and irrefutable steps through vast, seemingly incomprehensible landscapes of overwhelming complexity and detail, to bring out at a snap a crisp and powerful truth that is obvious once it is pointed out. As the absolute brilliance of the truth comes into focus, an absolute inevitability, completeness, and perfection accompany it, as if these proofs are not inventions of formal steps but rather the perfect discovery of the clear and simple truth they present. No one would have seen the truth without having seen it presented this way, but once seen, it is seen entirely and recognized absolutely. This is the stereotype of a mathematical proof: brief, efficient, clear, elegant, and pure. Classic style takes such elegance to be not merely normative but universal.

But there are problems in mathematics, like the four-color problem or the traveling salesman problem, that have been treated in a manner that is neither elegant nor pure. They are battles of attrition. The four-color problem, for example, was first solved by a computer program that spent night after night testing possibilities and ruling each out. The conception of this proof is of course extremely clever, but the proof itself, printed out, looks like what it is: the mechanical application of brute force. It is impossible to follow this proof, and no one could keep it all in mind. There is no clear and simple truth for anyone to see. The traveling salesman problem is still susceptible only to approximations and heuristics, again computer-assisted and very untidy. Many of the best mathematical minds of the last three centuries have sought an exact efficient solution to this and related problems, without success, leading to the current suspicion that there is no exact efficient solution. Worse, it is now widely suspected that there is not even an efficient approximate solution. If there is no efficient solution at all, the only approach to these problems is to work at this or that special case, and to leave off short of finality and perfection.

Mathematics acknowledges this situation and has invented many instruments, such as numerical methods, that do not fit the stereotype of brief, simple, and elegant proof. Classic style, on the other hand, acknowledges nothing that does not fit its model of elegance. The theology behind classic style does not admit that there is anything that counts as truth that cannot be presented briefly and memorably. In practice, this simply means that classic style prefers to limit its domain while tacitly claiming universal application.

Truth Is Not Mind-Independent

This, the most fundamental trade secret, concerns classic style's conception of truth. The classic stand on the elements of style depends upon a conception of a single objective state of affairs that is「the world」and a writer who sees that world without distortion. Of course, the classic writer has access to that world only through her own mind, but that mind has been cleared of all obstructions. In consequence, what it holds is a perfect and undistorted copy of objective truth.

Descartes formed the model for this view in saying that we can know there is God and that God would not have provided us with minds that are fundamentally deceptive. All error must therefore come from such perversions of our fundamental mental endowment as received opinion and prejudice. What is seen clearly and distinctly by a mind cleansed of perversions must necessarily be true.

The theology behind classic style has at its base this model: truth cannot be known independently of thought, but the thought through which it is known can be perfect. Although truth is never independent of mind, the classic writer can know a truth that can be conceived of as independent of mind, as purely「objective,」because the mind of the classic writer has introduced no distortion. There is no difference, then, between the truth the classic writer knows and the「objective」truth as seen from a God's-eye view, external to any particular mind.

The contemporary philosopher Hilary Putnam describes the view that there is an objective state of affairs that can be known objectively as an externalist perspective「because its favorite point of view is a God's Eye point of view.」

The trade secret, to put it bluntly, is that there is no such perspective available to anyone who is part of the human world. As Putnam says,「There is no God's Eye point of view that we can know or usefully imagine; there are only the various points of view of actual persons reflecting various interests and purposes that their descriptions and theories subserve.」Classic style always assumes that it might as well be standing outside the world of actual persons because the classic writer is above mere personal interest; he has no motive but truth, or at least, his highest and governing motive is truth. The classic perception of truth is a perfect copy of truth.

The trade secret can be expressed as two qualifications to the classic conception of truth. The first qualification is a practical limit: no writer can maintain for long the discipline needed to transcend personal interests and personal situations. The second qualification is an absolute limit: there is in fact no way at all even for the briefest space to know truth or the existence of truth independent of thought. All conceptions of truth and all supposedly true concepts are exactly that — conceptions and concepts.

The conception of truth assumed by classic style is based on what Putnam calls the「copy」theory: what is true corresponds to the mind-independent facts. Classic style cannot be described without recourse to this conception of truth, but the copy theory itself rests on a fundamentally impossible premise. How can we compare what we have thought and expressed in language to a mind-independent reality? How can we be independent of our own minds or have any access to what stands apart from mind? There have been many solutions proposed — they include Descartes's plan of cleansing the rational mind through applying judiciously the instrument of doubt, and the positivist plan of using the scientific method to factor out of theories any merely subjective components. But all such plans still involve human thought as the engine of escape, and it is not possible to escape the human mind through the faculties of the human mind.

It requires only a moment's thought to realize that any writer who claims that his writing is「clear and simple as the truth」is claiming that his access to the truth is essentially independent of his thought. It is a claim that can never be known to be true since, as Putnam says, it is impossible to verify a perfect correspondence (or any correspondence) between two things if we have access to just one of them. The classic writer actually has access only to his own thought. How can someone who has access only to thought check that his thought corresponds to mind-independent truth? It is like expecting someone who knows English but no Chinese to be able to claim that an English translation of a Chinese text is accurate. But the classic stand on the elements of style is always in the position of claiming that the translation is accurate with no access to the original except through the translation. The classic claim rests on impossible conditions — as do all the mature and consistent styles of which we are aware — but despite its internal incoherence, it has enjoyed an exceptionally important role in the way people think.

While it is beyond the scope of this book to consider in detail why such an incoherent view has had such a prominent place in the history of thought — much less to consider sophisticated alternatives to the copy theory — it is worth noting that the copy theory has an unparalleled two-thousand-year career in Western philosophy and has come to seem natural. Putnam thinks that「perhaps most philosophers hold some version of the ‘copy' theory of truth today」and furthermore that before Kant it may be impossible to find even one philosopher who did not hold such a theory. Even for Kant, the existence of some mind-independent reality is in Putnam's phrase「virtually a postulate of reason.」

「It's not what I think, it's what I know.」「See for yourself.」「Ask anyone.」「I would not have believed it if I hadn't seen it for myself.」「This shipment has been checked and verified by trained inspectors.」All of these common expressions are normally understood with the help of a tacit reference to the copy theory. This is one way of suggesting what we think to be the case: classic style is not「classic」for no reason. It is so deeply entrenched in our normal way of looking at the world that the only commonsense alternative seems to be that we just make up the world we see, and every claim is as「true」as every other. Although this dichotomy is naïve, it is commonly accepted as inevitable. On that view, there is only one alternative to the copy theory, and it is so generally unacceptable that the copy theory, warts and all, has been embraced as the only possible protection from chaos.

### 1.7 Envoi: Style Is Not Etiquette

This book is meant to be a guide to learning classic style and approaches its subject from the inside out, so to speak. Although it takes for granted that its audience writes in English, the style it discusses is not confined to any particular language. It is a style used by ancient Greek writers such as Thucydides, and it is a style used by a distinguished group of seventeenth-century French writers, most of whom knew no Greek; it is a style used by the French chemist Lavoisier in the eighteenth century, and by the American reporter and press critic A. J. Liebling in the twentieth. The principles this book discusses are a stand on the elements of style, not the foundation of a usage manual of one or more varieties of English. Anyone who has attained competence in any language can learn classic style because the principles of the style are as applicable to Japanese or Bengali as they are to English.

We have tried to distinguish the concept of style from the much broader concept of writing, but it is not easy to prevent two commonplace American conflations: style with writing, and writing with English. Most Americans learn to write in English courses, and surveys have shown that what most people mean by English is, first, spelling and then, usage (「can and may,」「affect and effect,」「imply and infer,」and so on through a list of indefinite length).

In addition to books treating fundamental aspects of writing, there is a large and ever-growing number of what amount to etiquette books on conventions of usage and other surface features that proceed from the tacit assumption that someone who masters all these points of etiquette will be able to write「English.」This assumption is a corollary of the thesis that knowing something consists of knowing surface details.

Consider a couple of almost universally effective put-downs based on this assumption.「How on earth can X know anything about epistemology? He can't even spell it!」The equivalent dismissal for spoken language is:「What can Y possibly know about Degas? She can't even pronounce his name!」These are almost invariably effective lines, even though neither has any merit. It is perfectly possible to know a great deal about anything anyone cares to name without being able to spell it or pronounce it according to a prevailing convention.

We will not say it is absolutely impossible to learn to write what will pass for standard English by learning everything in an etiquette book about current conventions in spelling and by consistently distinguishing「allusion」from「illusion」and making similar distinctions between all the other sets of terms frequently confused. But it is a most unlikely procedure, being something like Malcolm X's attempt to attain literacy by memorizing a dictionary. The problem is that anyone seeking to learn something about writing from an etiquette book — and dictionaries are one kind of linguistic etiquette book — remains forever passive to its advice; there is no set of principles to grasp that can ever make such a person independent of the etiquette book. Consider that a competent speaker of English will never make a mistake about fundamental word order: it really is impossible for such a speaker to be uncertain about whether to say「Pass me the molasses」or「Me molasses pass the,」but the same speaker may never be confident of spelling「molasses」correctly even if he becomes editor in chief of a newspaper or a professor of English.

What gives a writer command of a style is not mere correctness; even if an essay, a letter, a report, or a book is completely「correct,」it may also be completely incoherent; it may entirely fail to accomplish what its writer has set out to do. The performance, if merely correct, even should it work, can never be more than an isolated success that leaves no permanent trace. Charles de Gaulle once startled his hosts on a state visit to Moscow by delivering a speech in quite correct and intelligible Russian. Until then, he had not been known to speak the language. Intelligence services in several countries were embarrassed by their apparent lapse in gathering information about his linguistic range, until they found out that they had been right all along. He really did not speak Russian; he merely had been coached to pronounce the Russian words correctly, group them in an apparently thoughtful way by memorizing a tape, and deliver them with appropriate inflection through the same device. It was an actor's trick skillfully carried off. The performance was sensational, but it did not make de Gaulle a Russophone; he remained completely incompetent in the language.

This little book does not offer itself as a short cut to the impossible goal of learning to write English or any other language. It does not aim for something as vague as excellence in a skill as indefinite as writing English. It aims for the eminently possible goal of perfect understanding in a much more definite domain: classic style, with a local application to English. The first goal,「writing English,」is as much a mirage as perfect spelling; the second goal, writing classic prose, is as attainable as correct word order. If you cannot remember the difference between「effect」and「affect,」this book will not help you, and neither of its authors will ever win a spelling bee, but then no one can ever become a competent writer if we consider mastery of the indefinite list of accidentals at the surface of any language to be competence in writing. Is there any competent speaker of English anywhere who can pronounce, spell, and use every word in the OED or Webster's? Does that mean there are no competent speakers of English? What a competent writer can know perfectly are the principles of a style, and no style is an inert set of rules. Once the principles are grasped and the writer begins to use the style from a position of command, the writer becomes active in that style, and the style becomes part of the writer's active competence as surely and perfectly as word order. There is unlimited room for invention and discovery within the constraints of the style just as there is unlimited room for meaning and expression within the constraints of the word order of English, for the mastery of a style, like the underlying linguistic competence, is a living activity, not a rote performance.
