[I]l est impossible qu'avec tant de vérité, je ne vous persuade mon innocence.

[It is impossible that with such truth I should fail to persuade you of my innocence.]

Elle lui parla avec tant d'assurance, et la vérité se persuade si aisément lors même qu'elle n'est pas vraisemblable, que M. de Clèves fut presque convaincu de son innocence.

[She spoke to him with such assurance, and truth so easily persuades even where it is improbable, that Monsieur de Clèves was nearly convinced of her innocence.]

— Madame de Lafayette, La princesse de Clèves

Both of the selections from La princesse de Clèves come from a scene in which the princess is attempting to persuade her husband on his deathbed that she has not been unfaithful to him. Although she is not disinterested, the scene remains classic because the princess — an exceptional character with a disciplined and religious devotion to truth — is governed by a respect for truth and not by her interests. We include these passages because they illustrate the classic conception of truth and because they explicitly connect that conception of truth to persuasion.

The conviction that truth persuades easily even when it contradicts appearances almost certainly belongs to Madame de Lafayette herself, not just to the narrator of her most famous novel. It is not a view idly held by a naïve person. Madame de Lafayette was an intimate of Henrietta of England, Louis XIV's sister-in-law, and enjoyed exceptional access to the king. Although the details remain obscure, she was actively involved in political questions — exceptionally so for a woman. She lobbied the French court on behalf of the dowager duchess of Savoy and, through her, kept the French informed of Duke Amadeus's secret policy decisions. After the death of Henrietta in 1670, she retired from court citing ill health, but powerful members of the court continued to visit her in Paris for years afterward. She dined at the king's table in 1672 to celebrate the treaty of Versailles, and retained a strong influence with his minister Louvois. She had seen dozens of reputations made and destroyed by intrigue and had an extraordinary sense of how powerful an apparently disinterested presentation could be. She had a reputation for respecting truth and for despising people who, from weakness, tried to evade unpleasant truths.

The kind of persuasion that interested her most was the persuasion of private conversation. It happens, as in the passages cited here from her novel, that prejudice, interest, or passion may prevent truth from being accepted. But in her conception, as in the princess's, truth is naturally persuasive, so much so that even against appearances, it will carry conviction with any unbiased listener. It was this principle upon which she built a career that any modern political lawyer or lobbyist could envy.

We would naturally suspect the scene of being unclassic, because the princess is clearly interested, but she takes the classic pose that the highest and governing motive is truth, whatever immediate pressures she may feel. As she says,「J'avoue que les passions peuvent me conduire; mais elles ne sauraient m'aveugler.」‘i admit that passions can lead me, but they do not have the power to blind me.' We cannot control our interests — we lack the power always to be in a situation of disinterest — but those interests do not have to govern our actions, even if it takes an extraordinary discipline to discount them. Ordinarily, we do not trust someone who claims to be acting apart from his interests. It is for this reason that Madame de Lafayette has taken such pains to establish the exceptional fidelity to discipline in the princess as a character. Once the character has been established both by summary and by event, it is possible to believe that despite the pressures of interest, her actions are governed by the classic motive of truth. This motive, despite the temptations of self-interest, can govern the actions of anyone willing to submit to exceptional discipline. When a reader is persuaded that someone who could be affected by self-interest is in fact acting on truth, the classic concept that truth, no matter how unlikely, carries its own persuasive force can have an overwhelming effect.

Persuasion in the classic conception is the mere establishment of a classic scene in which truth definitively supersedes all actual or possible motives of interest. A speaker in a situation of interest who can establish this scene through whatever means has overcome the countervailing presumption that people are always governed by interest.

In general, it may be true that people are governed by interest, but it does not follow that everyone in all cases is governed by interest. The classic writer governed by truth belongs then to an aristocracy — an aristocracy open to anyone willing to submit to the discipline of classic style.

Hardy was something of a Turing of an earlier generation; he was another ordinary English homosexual atheist, who just happened to be one of the best mathematicians in the world.

— Andrew Hodges, Alan Turing: The Enigma

The study of history would be unnecessary for political education if the lessons to be drawn from great historic events could be summed up in a few trenchant sentences. We would then need no more than these final sentences. But political prudence does not consist in recipes which can be conveyed: it is a virtue which has to be acquired the hard way. The greatest possible economy of effort is achieved if a very competent guide takes you through the important experiences of others. He tells you just enough and not too much: why this step was taken and how it turned out to be disastrous. It is for you to think out why it turned out to be disastrous and how it might have been avoided: it is only by such personal speculation that one gains political education; in that realm, as in all others, one only learns by thinking for oneself.

— Bertrand de Jouvenel,「Introduction」to the Thomas Hobbes translation of Thucydides, The Peloponnesian War

There is an unargued assertion within Hodges's sentence, although one that is not controversial: in his lifetime G. H. Hardy was one of the best mathematicians in the world. There is also a tacit claim here that is a little more pointed: great mathematicians may be quite ordinary in other respects. Finally there is a disguised assertion that neither homosexuality nor atheism is an abnormality, either in such special populations as great mathematicians or in the population at large.

Both Hardy, Sadleirian Professor of Pure Mathematics at Cambridge, who died at seventy — a year after a botched suicide attempt — in 1947, and Alan Turing, convicted sex criminal sentenced to a hormonal「cure,」who committed suicide at forty-two in 1954, lived in a time and place that regarded both homosexuality and atheism as shocking abnormalities, neither of which ordinarily was associated with any form of eminence.

Hodges, who is both a mathematician and an active critic of the medical model of homosexuality, gives a devastating selection of examples illustrating British concepts of homosexuality in Turing's lifetime and the effects they had on the lives of homosexuals. His book certainly encourages some ways of thinking about the subject and discourages others, but it does so by using resources of classic style. The power of the book derives not mainly from overt argument, but from the invisible argument of presentation.

This sort of invisible argument attempts neither to show the inadequacies of other opinions nor to offer explicit support for its own. It depends almost exclusively on showing the reader where to look. Hodges, in this passage, seeks to place his readers in a certain perspective; he asks them to line up「homosexual atheist」with「great mathematician.」There are people who might be so horrified by「homosexual atheist」that the last thing they would think to associate with such a description is「great mathematician.」But Hodges neither pontificates nor condescends. He speaks as if, of course, his reader knows, as well as he does, that an atheist homosexual can be an ordinary Englishman as well as a great mathematician.

At first the passage from Bertrand de Jouvenel may seem to be similar to the passage from Hodges. Jouvenel, like Hodges, asserts rather than engaging in grinding step-by-step argument, but the assertions are not just presented as truths that the reader will recognize as a matter of course. Jouvenel's writing is not tortured, but it does not have the ring of spontaneous speech, either. His assertions are made as if they were the beginning of an argument, even though no argument follows. The passage departs from the model scene and cast of classic style. The scene is not a conversation between equals; it is the scene of professor to sophomore. The writer prides himself on having come through difficulties to the wisdom he has earned and asks his readers to accept what he says because he knows more than they do, not because they can verify what he says by sharing his perspective. What he says is plausible and well expressed, but it is really a form of pontificating. The style is not classic, although the sentences are fine, and lead to a nice, if unearned, generalization.

The truth is rarely pure, and never simple.

— Oscar Wilde, The Importance of Being Earnest

Understanding a people's culture exposes their normalness without reducing their particularity.

— Clifford Geertz,「Thick Description」in The Interpretation of Cultures

Pour s'établir dans le monde, on fait tout ce que l'on peut pour y paraître établi.

[To establish oneself in the world, one does everything one can to appear to be established there.]

— François VI, duc de La Rochefoucauld, Maximes

[N]othing is more certain, than that much of the force as well as grace of arguments or instructions, depends on their conciseness.

— Alexander Pope,「Design」for An Essay on Man

There is nothing immediate or「natural」in contrast to what is mediate or sophisticated; there are only degrees of sophistication.

— Michael Oakeshott, Experience and Its Modes

The chronologically earliest of the five brief texts in this exhibit was written in the seventeenth century, the latest in the twentieth. Written in different cultures, for different purposes, even in different languages, they appear in quite different sorts of works, yet they share a family resemblance. Each is built around a fine but「simple」and — once formulated — inevitable distinction.

They all take the stand of noticing, as if casually, something that the reader too can notice, once his attention is properly directed. The reader has the pleasure of being able to「verify」what each writer claims, although in each case there is a refinement of commonplace observation that amounts to novelty.

Wilde suffuses his most famous play, The Importance of Being Earnest, with the attitude that plain style's conception of truth is fundamentally wrong. He takes the central verbal cliché of plain style — truth is pure and simple — and refines it. Oakeshott, although not working from a specific verbal cliché, similarly introduces a conceptual refinement, one transforming crude polar categories into degrees along a gradient. Geertz takes two clichés of ethnography — to expose is to reduce; to see normality is to miss particularity — and recasts their terms into a specific and refined four-way balance. La Rochefoucauld takes conditions normally conceived of as distinct — belonging to a category versus striving to belong — and observes their inseparability in the case of becoming established in「the world,」where appearance is so nearly everything that careful imitation of a social state is an effective way of achieving it. Pope, a master of the phrase that illustrates its own meaning, reconsiders the crude opposition of force to grace and makes the fine observation that they share a common source in conciseness.

Neither Geertz nor Pope explicitly rejects an established verbal cliché, but each tacitly rejects a conceptual commonplace without making a fuss about it. Geertz implicitly rejects the notion that to expose a culture is to make it like all the rest, and Pope actually demonstrates that grace and force are not mutually exclusive. In each case, the effect is something like that of a brilliant move in chess; it was there all along and seems inevitable once made, but to see it in the first instance requires an uncommon refinement of perception.

You imagine what you desire; you will what you imagine; and at last, you create what you will.

— Bernard Shaw, the serpent speaking to Eve in Back to

Methuselah

The thought expressed in this passage has three steps. They are schematically identical. In each, an activity is located and then linked to its source in a different activity. There is a sentence expressing each step. Each of these sentences inherits the schematic structure of the thought, as in「You imagine what you desire.」Paired activities are expressed as paired clauses — 「you imagine」and「you desire」 — and the conceptual link between paired activities is mirrored in the linguistic link between paired clauses.

These three steps are not independent, but are ordered as a temporal sequence in which the product of one step serves as the source of the next. The grammatical structure mirrors this conceptual sequence: three sentences of the same grammatical form occur in linear order; the clause referring to the product in one sentence serves to refer to the source in the next.

Shaw's passage — with its precise and detailed combination of schematic images — is the result of conceptual and linguistic work, but the work is not exhibited. Reading the sentence is like watching a champion gymnast perform a routine on the parallel bars. Obviously the gymnastic performance is the result of previous work, but only the achievement is exhibited.

The achievement is final. In the classic view, thought comes first and language is sufficient to express it. Any problem of expression has an exact solution in the language, and this solution, once found, will appear to be obvious, perfect, and definitive. The writer knows when he has finished revising.

Perfection of phrasing in classic style is assumed to follow from precision of preceding thought. The classic writer draws precise conceptual distinctions and locates exact conceptual relations until the analysis is finished. He then expresses the result of this analysis. Its schematic conceptual structure is mirrored in the schematic linguistic structure. Often, the result appears to be something like a mathematical formulation.

In classic style, the goal of analysis is truth in its most efficient form consistent with accuracy. Expression, carrying the elegance that comes from compressed energy, is like a perfectly tuned stringed instrument: the strings are taut to exact degrees to correspond to exact pitches that stand in exact relations to one another. The pitches and their relations exist before the strings are tuned. Each string is tuned to a pitch and the results are judged by comparison to this pre-existing reality. A musician tuning an instrument is not finished until everything is exactly right, but once it is exactly right, there is simply nothing left to do.

Similarly, in the classic view, the thought exists before the expression, and the expression is judged by comparing it with the pre-existing thought. In writing a sentence, a writer knows when he has it exactly right, after which there is nothing left to do.

Shaw's sentence knows when to stop because it expresses a complete analysis. It might be contrasted with the following passage — written by an editor for the influential journal he edits — which isn't over even when it is over.

The concept of spatial form has unquestionably been central to modern criticism not only of literature but of the fine arts and of language and of culture in general. Indeed, the consistent goal of the natural and human sciences in the twentieth century has been the discovery and/or construction of synchronic structural models to account for concrete phenomena.

Classic style is not exclusive. A writer's position or status cannot make her a classic writer, or bar her from becoming a classic writer. An undergraduate at a junior college wrote the following classic passage in her discussion of the spatial form of Rembrandt's Old Man with a Gold Chain:

Rembrandt was a very young man when he painted this picture, but it is a work demonstrating the insight and wisdom of an older man. It is a poignant picture and painful to look upon because it is not just a painting of a man, but an expression of mortality.

. . . l'amour-propre & la confiance en nous-mêmes, qu'il sait si bien nous inspirer, nous sollicitent à tirer des conséquences qui ne dérivent pas immédiatement des faits; en sorte que nous sommes en quelque façon intéressés à nous séduire nous-mêmes.

[. . . self-love and self-confidence (which so easily inspires us) tempt us to draw consequences that do not derive immediately from facts; so that we become in a fashion interested in deceiving ourselves.]

— Antoine Laurent Lavoisier,「Discours préliminaire」to Traité élémentaire de chimie

On n'est jamais si heureux ni si malheureux qu'on s'imagine.

[One is never so happy or unhappy as one thinks.]

 — François VI, duc de La Rochefoucauld, Maximes

Car il me semblait que je pourrais rencontrer beaucoup plus de vérité dans les raisonnements que chacun fait touchant les affaires qui lui importent, et dont l'événement le doit punir bientôt après s'il a mal jugé, que dans ceux que fait un homme de lettres dans son cabinet, touchant des spéculations qui ne produisent aucun effect, et qui ne lui sont d'autre conséquence, sinon que peut-être il en tirera d'autant plus de vanité qu'elles seront plus éloignées du sens commun. . . .

[For it seemed to me that I could find a great deal more truth in the reasonings everyone makes concerning his own affairs, and whose consequences will quickly make him suffer if he has made a mistake, than in those made by a man of letters in his study, concerning speculations that have no effect whatever, and no consequence for him except perhaps to allow him to feel prouder according as they are further from common sense. . . .]

— René Descartes, Discours de la méthode

. . . la puissance de bien juger et distinguer le vrai d'avec le faux, qui est proprement ce qu'on nomme le bon sens ou la raison, est naturellement égale en tous les hommes; et ainsi, que la diversité de nos opinions ne vient pas de ce que les uns sont plus raisonnable que les autres, mais seulement de ce que nous conduisons nos pensées par diverses voies, et ne considérons pas les mêmes choses. Car ce n'est pas assez d'avoir l'esprit bon, mais le principal est de l'appliquer bien. Les plus grandes âmes sont capables des plus grands vices aussi bien que des plus grandes vertus, et ceux qui ne marchent que fort lentement peuvent avancer beaucoup d'avantage, s'ils suivent toujours le droit chemin, que ne font ceux qui courent, et qui s'en éloignent.

[. . . the power to judge well and to distinguish the true from the false, which is properly what one calls common sense or reason, is naturally equal in everyone; and thus the diversity of our opinions does not come from some of us being more reasonable than others, but only from our conducting our thoughts in different ways and not considering the same things. For it is not enough to have a sound mind but the principal point is to apply it well. The greatest souls are capable of the greatest vices as well as the greatest virtues, and those who walk only very slowly can get much further ahead if they always keep to the right way than those who run in another direction.]

 — René Descartes, Discours de la méthode

This juxtaposition of classic French texts — from chemistry, philosophy, and the observation of human behavior — very nearly speaks for itself. While everyone is endowed with reason, everyone's reason is compromised by self-deception and self-interest. Classic thought depends upon finding a way, through discipline, of avoiding these frailties and avoiding, too, pride at having avoided them. This is of course impossible.

The self cannot be escaped, but it can be, with ingenuity and hard work, distracted.

— Donald Barthelme,「Daumier」

Classic style lends itself to the expression of a complete temperament in a single statement. People who do not like this style think of this feature as a narrowness, a sameness that falls into routine or self-parody; people who admire the style think of its aphoristic character as a consistency that is something like integrity. Barthelme's sentence is much more than a statement or an observation. It is the expression of an attitude toward life. It is like the autobiography of a temperament in miniature. Its subject is central to the temperament in question — the self, conceived as a sort of cage. Naturally, someone in a cage would like to get out, but the first clause assures us there is no escape. Curiously, this situation leads neither to despair nor to passivity but to action. For,「with hard work and ingenuity,」the victim of selfhood can achieve if not the ideal goal then the most desirable practical alternative. It is a rather bleak picture of the world, but one in which there is a surprising reason to value effort and skill.

This temperament is at odds with the temperament found in Jefferson or Descartes, neither of whom begins with a restriction on basic human possibilities. Temperaments of resignation similar to Barthelme's can be found, however, in a few notable classic French writers of the seventeenth century. La Rochefoucauld, for example, assumes that there are fundamental restrictions on basic human possibilities: self-knowledge is unavailable and the knowledge one has of others, if correct, always reveals them to be acting from self-interest. La Rochefoucauld's maxim「On n'est jamais si heureux ni si malheureux qu'on s'imagine」(One is never as happy or as unhappy as one imagines) expresses a temperament resigned to unalterable restrictions on human possibilities.

Barthelme's thought is globally structured by a schematic movement to a goal, in two impulses: a failed step toward an ideal goal — marked as impossible — and a subsequent step to a substitute. The first impulse is desire, the second, acceptance. The second impulse is interrupted right before it comes to its expected end by a consideration of the unanticipated and quite difficult requirements for attaining this inferior but possible goal.

The sentence imitates the schematic form of the thought it expresses: it moves directly toward a goal to be rejected (escape) and then moves from the rejected goal toward the available goal (distraction). Grammatically, we expect a participle to follow「can be.」

But the sentence takes an unexpected grammatical detour, through a parenthesis. This grammatical detour creates a sense of the distraction to which the end of the sentence refers.

Inserting the parenthesis「with ingenuity and hard work」into the final verb phrase destroys the symmetry of a radical version of this sentence:「The self cannot be escaped, but it can be distracted.」Adding this nuance suggests a distinction between the fantasy of escape and the arduous work of distraction. Escape, because it is impossible, is not burdened with conditions. Distraction belongs to a different order of things, an order neither so desirable nor so uncomplicated as the order of fantasy.

In the classic view, truth comes with structure that is part of its meaning and is preferably to be inherited by its expression. The structure of expression is therefore, by this inheritance, meaningful — two grammatically equivalent expressions can have different meanings. Let us consider two such expressions:

The self cannot be escaped, but it can be, with ingenuity and hard work, distracted.

The self cannot be escaped, but with ingenuity and hard work it can be distracted.

The first has a schematic structure of derailment, delay, distraction, and arduousness in reaching a goal. It inherits this structure from the thought it expresses. The second does not have this schematic structure. The difference is only a nuance, but the nuance is indispensable.

Classic style is highly attentive to nuance, and as a consequence is highly sensitive to the schematic structure of expression. In the classic view, nuance is neither arbitrary nor decorative; it is meaning. Nuance is recognized through discipline and precision and can be lost sight of through carelessness. Classic style lives on fine distinctions. However fine they may be, their significance is absolute. Two things that are almost the same are in fact different, and classic style was invented as an instrument for presenting such careful discriminations.

Classic expression presents the simplest accurate result of analysis. It presupposes that an analysis has been completed, and it is distinguished by expressing the result in the simplest accurate form. The thought locates exact distinctions, exact relations, exact objects and forms; the expression presents this analyzed array. The expression is clear and simple as the truth, but no clearer or simpler. Barthelme's sentence is classic in expressing a precise analysis. It does this clearly and simply without blurring the fine distinctions indispensable to the thought.

They fuck you up, your mum and dad. They may not mean to, but they do.

— Philip Larkin, from「This Be The Verse」in High Windows

These two sentences, here set out as prose, are the first two lines of a twelve-line poem. Although Larkin uses conventional poetic forms of meter and rhyme, he imparts to his poetry the sound of talk — casual, spontaneous, conversational. His best poetry not only aspires to, but achieves the condition of classic prose.

His first line,「They fuck you up, your mum and dad,」sounds like a conversational observation; the words seem to be as commonplace as the thought, but they unobtrusively give vitality back to the cliché they express. The observation crystallizes a vast and indefinite history of personal experience without incorporating any of it, and the reader is expected to be able to confirm the truth immediately from her own experience.

His next line,「They may not mean to, but they do,」sounds like an afterthought. In fact, it is an example of the writer doing all the work invisibly. Larkin deliberately avoids the surface brilliance of classic writers such as La Rochefoucauld, or Shaw, or Wilde, preferring instead the maximum understatement of his capacity and labor — on a casual reading, their very existence can go unsuspected. These lines are however a deliberate presentation after the writer has done quite a lot of invisible work. Try any alternative — 「your mum and dad fuck you up even if they don't mean to,」for example — and see how flat and unmemorable this unforgettable little text becomes.

We can begin to see how careful and studied this passage actually is, despite its deceptively casual presentation, if we consider Larkin's choice of words. A moment's reflection will establish that your mum and dad are not the same as your mother and father or your mommy and daddy or dad and mom. The phrase「mum and dad」is a set phrase used to refer to parents as they inhabit a particular role with respect to their children. A native speaker of English, particularly British English, knows exactly when and under what circumstances to use this phrase, but the amount and variety of this knowledge is vast. It is the perfect phrase for referring to parents in Larkin's text because it is precisely in their capacity as「mum and dad」that they「fuck you up.」The language has supplied a perfect phrase for crystallizing the extraordinarily complicated normal history wherein parents not deficient as parents nonetheless routinely, predictably, and inevitably debilitate their children.「They may not mean to, but they do.」

Profanity is almost never encountered in classic prose, exactly because the usual reasons for using it are unclassic. It is rarely a precise instrument of presentation and often has the effect of slurring or smudging an observation. The nonstandard「mum and dad,」the vulgar「fuck you up」exceptionally in this text fit their subject precisely. As a result, the expression itself, while disguised as commonplace, is unstridently memorable and undeniably certified by the culture whose artifacts are these phrases.

The novels of Theodore Dreiser, Marxist political rhetoric, the landscape of northern New Jersey, souvenir shops in airports — these have the special qualities of an ugly which is at once settled into itself, varied in its particulars, yet bound to go on and on interminably.

— Robert Martin Adams, Bad Mouth

Mme de Chevreuse avait beaucoup d'esprit, d'ambition et de beauté; elle était galante, vive, hardie, entreprenante; elle se servait de tous ses charmes pour réussir dans ses desseins, et elle a presque toujours porté malheur aux personnes qu'elle y a engagées.

[Madame de Chevreuse had sparkling intelligence, ambition, and beauty in plenty; she was flirtatious, lively, bold, enterprising; she used all her charms to push her projects to success, and she almost always brought disaster to those she encountered on her way.]

— La Rochefoucauld, Mémoires

When La Rochefoucauld wrote his description of Madame de Chevreuse, Theodore Dreiser had written no novels, there was no Marxist political rhetoric, the landscapes of northern New Jersey were unexplored by English professors, there were no souvenir shops in airports, there were no airports. He and Robert Martin Adams are each saturated in local knowledge of a certain kind, but they live in different worlds and speak of different things. Yet their observations share a great deal if we consider not what they have to say but how they arrange what they say.

Each of them builds carefully to a point, a point known from the beginning but reserved and prepared for so that it will achieve its maximum effect without seeming to be forced. Each of them assumes a pose of abundant and assured experience from which he speaks. They succeed in turning away the normal temptation to question their unargued judgments because they do not betray any anxiety by overstatement. Adams is disarming in suggesting that he is familiar with not just this kind of ugly but other varieties as well. It is as if the question of these things being ugly is settled; he is concerned only to make sure he has placed them in the right category of ugly.

La Rochefoucauld succeeds in suggesting that he has a wide acquaintance among women, some of them attractive, others talented or ambitious, none of them quite like Madame de Chevreuse. Both La Rochefoucauld and Adams speak from a secure haven. Adams is not threatened by the bleak and eternal ugly he delineates; La Rochefoucauld will not be enlisted in any of Madame de Chevreuse's projects. Their position of safety suggests that they have no urgent interest in getting their readers to believe what they say, and this implicit claim is supported by the structure and tone of the sentences themselves.

Adams's sentence has a musing tone to it and certainly his own expression has not been invaded by any variety of the ugly. La Rochefoucauld is not eager to say anything negative about Madame de Chevreuse; there is a tone of appreciation and equity to his description. The proven danger of associating with her does not subtract from her attractive qualities, which are abundant andnot commonly united in a single person. Consider how different the effect would be if he had said,「Even though Madame de Chevreuse was beautiful, intelligent, . . .」

While neither of these sentences expresses the least doubt and both make positive, unshaded judgments that might court a reader's resistance, they distract resistance by making the sort of fine distinctions that are the expression of serene, unrushed judgment. Such distinctions cannot be made casually; they are the result of work, observation, testing — something like research. None of this effort is allowed to show, however, in the expression; even the writing is made to sound easy. Neither writer suggests that he has considered ways of disarming a reader's impulse to question, although each of them has anticipated problems and devised solutions.

Although each word has been carefully weighed and carefully placed, the finished sentences suggest spontaneous speech. It is only on reflection that we see how impossible it would be for someone spontaneously to say something so complex and perfect. (Almost any change in either sentence would be a change for the worse.) Neither writer wants to suggest that what he is doing is work. That is why so much work has gone into getting this writing to suggest speech; writing suggests effort and work, persuasive writing suggests strategy. To make writing imitate speech is a great deal of work and yet the happy phrase that is just right and suggests that it is just right simply because it is true can happen in conversation — usually after a lot of forgotten false starts.

All these shared characteristics are what makes it possible to see these sentences as stylistically similar, even though they do not share a subject or even a language.

A heroic, photographically literal statue of [Huey Long] stands on a high pedestal above his grave in the Capitol grounds. The face impudent, porcine and juvenal, is turned toward the building he put up — all thirty-four stories of it — in slightly more than a year, mostly with Federal money. The bronze double-breasted jacket, tight over the plump belly, has already attained the dignity of a period costume, like Lincoln's frock coat. In bronze, Huey looks like all the waggish fellows from Asheville and Nashville, South Bend and Topeka, who used to fill our costlier speakeasies in the late twenties and early thirties. He looks like a golf-score-and-dirty-joke man, anxious for the good opinion of everybody he encounters. Seeing him there made me feel sad and old. A marble Pegasus carved in bas-relief below his feet bears a scroll that says,「Share Our Wealth.」That was one of Huey's slogans; another was「Every Man a King.」

— A. J. Liebling, The Earl of Louisiana

In this last chapter I wish to observe and trace the transformation of American Africanism from its simplistic, though menacing, purposes of establishing hierarchic difference to its surrogate properties as self-reflexive meditations on the loss of the difference, to its lush and fully blossomed existence in the rhetoric of dread and desire.

— Toni Morrison, Playing in the Dark: Whiteness and the Literary Imagination

Christopher Lehmann-Haupt, in a New York Times review of Toni Morrison's essay Playing in the Dark and her novel Jazz, cited this sentence as an example of the essay's style, which he contrasted with what he called the poetry of her novel. He expressed disapproval of「the style she employs to make her points.」His tacit and conventional assumption, almost an enabling convention in journalism, is that style is completely separable from thought. Morrison, accordingly, should have presented her thought in a more immediately intelligible style. This is the same assumption that underwrites the many programs for correcting prose by giving its surface a final jiggle to shake out blemishes and clots.

The difficulty in Morrison's sentence lies not in its surface but in its thought. The image-schematic structure of the sentence — spatial movement along a path from location to location — is basic and classic. Here is an immediately intelligible sentence formed on that image schema:

I want to observe and trace the history of Christianity as it moved from its origin as a Jewish heresy, to the state religion of the Roman Empire, to the high religion of medieval Europe.

Combined with this image schema is a basic metaphor: ideas, beliefs, and institutions — which are not physical objects and which do not move — can be understood metaphorically as physical objects that do move; different states are metaphorically different locations; transformation is metaphorically movement from one spatial location to another; the history of an idea, a belief, or an institution can be「followed」by「tracing」visually the「path」「traced」by its「movement」in historical time. Morrison's sentence and the sentence about Christianity are equally built upon this union of metaphor and image schema. But the sentence about Christianity is immediately intelligible while Morrison's is not. The difference lies in the conception of subject.

Classic style conceives of its subject, whether concrete or abstract, as a publicly available「thing」clear and distinct at all levels — from anatomy to fine detail. This cultural「thing」can be acknowledged by any competent observer who looks at it. Its existence is independent of the writer's conception and certainly independent of the writer's prose. A subject conceived of in this way as a「thing」fits nicely the image schema of spatial movement and the metaphor of change as spatial movement.

Even if a reader cannot offer any precise description of Christianity, and may be barely able to distinguish it from Buddhism, it will be acknowledged by most likely readers of The New York Times — and certainly by Christopher Lehmann-Haupt — as if it were observable in the same sense that the statue of Huey Long on the Capitol grounds in Baton Rouge is observable.「American Africanism,」unlike Christianity, calls attention to itself as an abstraction precisely because it does not have the sort of agreed-about borders, however imprecise, that a concept needs before it leaves the status of special conception intelligible to special audiences and becomes a vulgar cliché indistinguishable for rhetorical purposes from a planet whose path can be traced.

A similar difficulty attaches to the three stages of American Africanism's history, all of which are unfamiliar abstractions, none of which has general currency in contemporary American culture.「Medieval Europe」is also an abstraction, but it has general currency; a reader of The New York Times can be expected to accept such an abstraction as definite and legitimate even if that reader's image of medieval Europe is completely featureless, since such a reader will believe he could, so to speak, look it up.「The rhetoric of dread and desire」does not enjoy a similar standing, so that the lush and fully blossomed existence of American Africanism in the rhetoric of dread and desire is an existence that cannot be accepted as a matter of course.

Morrison is not offering arbitrarily difficult descriptions of what can be described in「another style,」that is, more accessible language. She is talking about special concepts without common currency whose very existence depends on her thought. As a result, the passage features an asymmetry between writer and reader that marks her style as unclassic. A writer presenting such a subject in classic style could not trace a movement before establishing the reality of American Africanism down to quite fine details, so that the reader can accept it as a「thing」he can experience. The model scene would have to be substituted unobtrusively for an actual scene of persuasion, and the classic writer would have to persuade his reader that she can accept American Africanism the way she can accept the planet Venus, and that the path of American Africanism can be traced the way an astronomer can trace the planet's path. The abstract nature of the subject is no impediment to such a conception: a cultural historian like Chastel, a connoisseur of old painting like Friedländer, a New Testament interpreter like Dodd, a mathematical physicist like Feynman, an observer of the emotions like Madame de Lafayette, and an observer of society like Madame de Sévigné can present the most abstract matters in the most abstract fields as if they were talking about statues, strawberries, or the evening star.

The passage from A. J. Liebling describing the statue of Huey Long may seem at first glance to have nothing in common with the passage from Toni Morrison. Morrison is talking about a cultural abstraction and its sequence of change; Liebling is talking about a static statue that anyone standing at Huey Long's grave can see. The juxtaposition of these passages may suggest an attempt to illustrate the advice of so many writing manuals to be「concrete,」and to avoid abstractions. It is, of course, impossible either to think or write without using abstractions, so like most scattershot advice, the mantra「be concrete, avoid abstractions」is generally useless in practice. The mantra is nevertheless at least remotely related to a sound observation about style, in the way, for example, that the phrase「you can't be certain of anything」is related to Heisenberg's Uncertainty Principle.

Liebling's description of Huey Long's statue turns on concepts about American culture in the 1920s and 1930s that are as abstract as anything in Toni Morrison's passage and are at least as personal to Liebling as anything Morrison says about the movement of American Africanism is personal to her. The stylistic difference between them rests on how they treat those abstractions. It is easy to feel excluded from Morrison's vision of American Africanism because she does not choose to conceive of her subject as a「thing」that anyone can verify. As a result, the abstract nature of her concepts is put into relief, and she leaves the reader with the choice of either accepting what she says or considering it, to a greater or lesser degree, an arbitrarily personal vision.

Liebling demonstrates a typical classic elision from what is easy for any reader to see for herself — the statue — to his highly personal interpretation, based on abstract cultural and ethical concepts. He never says that anyone else can see the cultural matrix into which he places the statue; he treats that matrix as a matter of course and suggests that its finest details can be delineated by anyone who was there. As a result, it requires deliberate analysis to realize that while anyone can verify the existence of the statue and the inscription on the scroll (「Share Our Wealth」), the interpretation that has been slipped between the description of the statue and the description of the scroll can be seen by no one who does not agree to accept Liebling's reflection as a thing. This agreement, Liebling recognizes, requires persuasion, but he never explicitly acknowledges a need to persuade. Instead, he addresses his problem by artful juxtaposition and tacit assurances that what he supplies (whether fact or interpretation) is as reliable as what is right there in front of him and — accidents of time and place aside — can be right there in front of you. Consider the comparison between「Share Our Wealth,」the slogan actually carved on the scroll, and「Every Man a King,」which Liebling cites as another of Huey Long's slogans. The second slogan is nowhere to be seen at the gravesite, but it is one of Huey Long's best-known lines. Liebling's claim can be verified by anyone who checks the relevant sources. It is only an invisible step to treat the interpretation as something that can be verified in the relevant sources too, and it is a classic technique to distract the reader from observing that the relevant source in this case is the writer's imagination.

When that was once begun, it was as little in my fear, that what words of complaint I heard among lerned men of other parts utter'd against the Inquisition, the same I should hear by as lerned men at home utterd in time of Parlament against an order of licencing; and that so generally, that when I had disclos'd my self a companion of their discontent, I might say, if without envy, that he whom an honest quæstorship had indear'd to the Sicilians, was not more by them importun'd against Verres, then the favourable opinion which I had among many who honour ye, and are known and respected by ye, loaded me with entreaties and perswasions; that I would not despair to lay together that which just reason should bring into my mind, toward the removal of an undeserved thraldom upon lerning.

— John Milton, Areopagitica

This passage, a single sentence of 142 words, is almost impossible to understand at one reading. Although it comes from an essay ostensibly meant to be a speech to Parliament, it does not model itself on speech and distances itself self-consciously from any possible model of conversation. It has no image schema indicating a clear direction or a goal. It is in every way unclassic and offers a striking contrast to the most conspicuous style of French prose contemporary with it.

It would be tempting for any contemporary writing consultant to offer a sort of over-the-counter prescription for improving this sentence if it were not for the fact that it occurs in a major seventeenth-century prose text that has been studied and admired around the world for over three centuries. Such a writing consultant would place a premium on clarity and would suggest effective means of rewriting the entire Areopagitica so as to make it easier to parse. But Milton would have viewed these revisions as a complete destruction of his mature and accomplished style, and he would have been right.

Clarity is a prime virtue within classic style or practical style, and it is easy to begin judging other styles by the standards of one of these general styles, especially for writers who actually use one of them on a regular basis. Classic style, like practical style, encourages such judgments by making a tacit claim to being a universal style. But this claim is deceptive. Neither classic style nor practical style can suit Milton's purposes because his model scene is not the scene essential to either classic or practical style. In this way, this passage resembles Samuel Johnson's opening comments in his「Preface to Shakespeare」: both Milton and Johnson write in mature and consistent styles completely incompatible with either classic or practical style. The model scene behind classic style is conversation, with the result that it tends to come in discrete units, intelligible when excerpted. The model scene behind the Areopagitica requires a display of ostentatiously orchestrated erudition. This scene places the highest premium on gravity and allusion — not on clarity. Far from depending on a model of conversation, it is not even modeled on English speech; it is modeled on written Latin. The influence of Milton's model scene upon his style is such that an excerpted passage may be nearly unintelligible, but there is no reason for Milton to view this as a fault. He does not mean the Areopagitica to live through pithy excerpts, and he most certainly would suffer from using a style that looks as if it is easy to parse or conveniently packaged into easily digested bites. To rewrite the Areopagitica in the style of La Rochefoucauld or A. J. Liebling would be to ensure that the reader Milton is addressing would immediately brand it as trivial.

Socrates in the Apology expresses a touchstone of classic style, as if it were a fundamental priority of all style:「If you hear me defending myself in the same language which it has been my habit to use, both in the open spaces of this city (where many of you have heard me) and elsewhere, do not be surprised.」

He explicitly refuses to adopt the mannered style of the courtroom, and he implies that there is something artificial and dishonest in that style. He adopts as his model scene conversation, voice, spontaneity. As a result, it is easy to excerpt from his speech discrete, intelligible units of discourse. The Apology is, after all, with a very minimum of glossing, perfectly intelligible today in translation to audiences in Oregon or Ohio or Hong Kong, audiences who know absolutely nothing about the conventions of Athenian courtrooms at the beginning of the fourth century B.c.

By contrast, imagine a speech by an Athenian orator whose main goal, unlike Socrates', is to win his case. Contemporary readers in Hong Kong or Ohio cannot, of course, imagine any such thing in detail. The specific good moves in such a speech would go unnoticed or function as barriers to understanding in much the fashion that Milton's elaborate syntax and classical allusions do in the passage from the Areopagitica. It would be impossible to「correct」Milton's style (or the Athenian orator's) without understanding the scene that helps define his style as well as he does. Only a few specialists in seventeenth-century English parliamentary history have any such knowledge today, and it is not obvious that any of them now knows how to address the Parliament that Milton wished to address as well as Milton did himself. No general principle (「Omit needless words,」for example) can ever supersede a specific knowledge of such elements of style as the scene and cast that help define a style, for only they can indicate which words are needless.

While I've indicated to you previously that we may well have, probably do have, enough monetary stimulus in the system to create that [economic recovery], I'm not sure that we will not need some insurance or to revisit this issue, and all I can say to you is that we're all looking at the same set of data, the same economy, the same sense of confidence which pervades it. We're all making our judgments with respect to how that is evolving with respect to economic activity and where the risks of various different actions are. And there will be differences inevitably.

— Alan Greenspan, chairman of the Federal Reserve Board, responding to senators at a congressional hearing, who were trying to get him to cut interest rates in order to speed economic recovery (March 1992)

This passage from Alan Greenspan, as reported by The New York Times of 20 April 1992, is certainly not an example of classic style, but it is a definite style and a cultivated one. Since it is above all a spoken style (meant, however, to be read in newspaper accounts), Mr. Greenspan refers to it as「an incoherent mumble.」Its virtues are just the opposite of classic style's virtues, and performances in this style should not be confused with the speaker's general level of articulateness. It is not a style of obfuscation as it is sometimes claimed to be, for its speaker is not hiding a conclusion or a point that he actually expresses buried in all that confusing verbiage. It is rather a style of gridlock, expressed in a manner that is built around images of contradictory and asymmetrical motion and a shifting kaleidoscope of qualifications. It is not, like classic style, a general style; it is a special style deliberately deployed by the relatively few people in positions like that of the chairman of the Federal Reserve Board, whose powers are vast and whose words are carefully studied for hints of what they are likely to do. If the passage is pored over carefully, it gives no hint about whether Greenspan will or will not lower interest rates, whether he has made up his mind on the subject, or even whether he agrees that lowering interest rates will have the effect that the senators think it will have.

For powerful directors of policy forced to testify in public, the virtues of classic style can be disastrous. The protocol of congressional hearings requires that the respondents appear to respect the committee, so people like Alan Greenspan cannot say,「I'm here because I have to be here, but I'm not telling you anything.」The unusual circumstances of this scene require the successful practitioner to give the impression that he or she actually may have said something of substance, and to avoid at all costs inviting any further clarifying questions of an obvious sort. If Greenspan had said,「I think we've already lowered interest rates enough, but we are monitoring the situation continually and it may be that at some point it will make sense to lower them further. I will do what I think is indicated at the appropriate time, and that may not be what you think is indicated,」he would have made his essential points much more clearly, but at an unacceptable cost. It is unwise for him to indicate to the senators in a clear fashion that he will do what he thinks best and will be unaffected by anything they think, nor does he wish clearly to rule out what they suggest since it is against his interests to indicate either that he will or will not lower the interest rates and equally against his interests to give any indication about when he will make up his mind. The hypothetical revision is clearer certainly, but it invites unwelcome questions: Then you have ruled out, for the moment, lowering interest rates? Under what future circumstances will it make sense to lower the rates further? What are you watching as an indicator that the current rates are too high?

All of these questions must be warded off because he really does not wish to give any indication of his future course of action. Various markets would react to any hint he may give of what he is likely to do. In the circumstances,「While I've indicated to you previously that we may well have, probably do have, enough monetary stimulus in the system to create that . . .」is in every way superior to「I think we've already lowered interest rates enough.」The statement is so filled with qualifications and so indefinite even with respect to its effective date or what it is talking about that it says absolutely nothing about what he may do while seeming to offer a concession.「While I said x at some point in the past,」leads the audience to expect「I say y now.」That is not the actual sequence, and what does follow is so much at odds with what is expected, and so entirely shapeless, that it is not immediately clear that there is actually no concession. Everything is done to leave doubt on later analysis even that he still thinks enough has been done now「to create that」(create what? the exasperated reader says), since the whole phrase is framed by「I've indicated to you previously,」and does not offer the expected symmetrical statement about what the speaker is indicating now. Greenspan uses subtle verbal resources to avoid the unhedged present indicative and to erase any momentary appearance of stable assertion: modals, ambiguous reference, adverbs of doubt, locations of events in an indefinite future or an indefinite ongoing present.

This passage and a consideration of the special requirements of its exceptional scene can serve as a reminder first, that what is a vice in one style can be a virtue in another and second, that there are not merely two styles, good and bad, but many styles, some general, some highly specialized. Almost any English composition teacher would say that this passage「needs revision,」and may go on to suggest what is wrong with it. In fact, there is nothing wrong with it. It is a virtuoso performance of stonewalling disguised as incoherence. There is nothing sloppy about it. It is not unplanned. It is deliberate in its contradiction of the expected symmetrical and directional image schema whose expectations it frustrates with exquisite skill. It is a performance as precise as a cat's walking though a chaos of objects on a messy desk without disturbing any of them.

This memorandum . . . deals with what might be called the least important questions confronting authors and publishers. But it is precisely because of their relative unimportance, despite their capacity for mischief-making, that we should be able to take them in our stride. The effort, in other words, is to remove them from the problem category so that we can devote our energy to matters of larger significance — authors and editors to intelligent and imaginative control of fact and expression, designers and compositors to efficient and artistic typesetting, proofreaders to rapid and precise detection of inaccuracies.

Although there are some matters of comma style (for instance, restrictive vs. nonrestrictive clauses) so well established in custom as to have become rules, nearly all are merely matters of taste. We prefer a comma before the conjunction in a series (「red, white, and blue」), and also after「i.e.」and「e.g.」

— 「Memorandum for Authors, Editors, Compositors, Proofreaders on the Preparation of Manuscripts and the Handling of Proof,」Princeton University Press, January 1990

English orthography satisfies all the requirements of the canons of reputability under the law of conspicuous waste. It is archaic, cumbrous, and ineffective; its acquisition consumes much time and effort; failure to acquire it is easy of detection.

— Thorstein Veblen, The Theory of the Leisure Class

The attitude of the memorandum from Princeton University Press might come as a surprise to readers of the guides and handbooks used in English composition courses, where questions of capitalization, spelling, punctuation, and usage seem to constitute not just the most conspicuous surface aspects of writing but practically the whole subject. The reason for this common misordering of priorities is precisely the conspicuous nature of these accidentals. That is why Thorstein Veblen suggested in a classic work of sociology that spelling is meant to indicate a form of social distinction based on the leisure to learn an arbitrary and inefficient system. Such things as the pronunciation and spelling of place names often serve as a marker distinguishing the local population from outsiders. A distinguished American theologian who pulled off a highway to ask directions to Beloit, which he pronounced in the French manner (bell-wah), was quickly informed, once the laughter died down,「Beh-LOIT, buddy. You're in Wisconsin now.」

Accidentals hardly enter into the elements of style at all, but they can cause any amount of mischief unless they are well managed because they indicate the writer's knowledge of etiquette and protocol. The idea that dictionaries and handbooks control these questions is a common misunderstanding. Dictionaries and handbooks try as hard as they can to keep up with the practice of a vaguely defined set of speakers who together determine prevailing limits of taste in such matters. Dictionary editors are in the same position as individuals who do not wish to be conspicuous in the wrong way. But unlike many of these individuals, the editors understand that they are observing a contest in social influence, not recording — much less defining — a correct position.

In Lulu in Hollywood, Louise Brooks, who must be the best writer among all the sex symbols of the silent screen, explains that she became painfully aware of her Kansas accent because it made her sound provincial in New York. She encountered a Columbia University student at the soda fountain of a drugstore she frequented and flattered him into becoming her speech teacher. In her own words,

「Mulk」became「milk,」and「kee-yow」became「cow.」Then:「Not ‘watter' as in ‘hotter' but ‘water' as in ‘daughter.' And it's not ‘hep,' you hayseed — it's ‘help,' ‘help,' ‘help'!」Within a month of fudge sundaes, this boy had picked his way through my vocabulary, eliminating the last trace of my hated Kansas accent. From the start, it had been my intention not to exchange one label for another. I didn't want to speak the affected London stage-English of the high-comedy stars, like Ina Claire and ruth chatterton; I wanted to speak clean, unlabeled English. My soda jerk spoke clean, unlabeled English.

Louise Brooks was no doubt right to think that in New York in the 1920s a femme fatale could not go around saying「kee-yow」instead of「cow,」but consider how wrong she is to think that she had acquired「unlabeled」English. She had merely dropped an unfashionable label for one that was more suitable to the image she sought to project. Even if we leave her native Kansas out of the question, how would her New York soda jerk's「clean, unlabeled English」sound in Baton Rouge, Louisiana? Fort Worth, Texas? Chicago, Illinois? Or even across the bridge in Brooklyn?

The same social principle applies to many conspicuous aspects of language, none of which determines style. Consider the disappearance of the word「Negro」from contemporary American usage and the currently tenuous position of its successor,「black.」At what point was「Negro」archaic usage and who decided the question? Certainly not American dictionaries. They merely surveyed current usage until they determined that the change had become general. The same phenomenon is going on today with the term「black,」which itself may soon become archaic in general usage to be replaced by either「Afro-American」or「African American.」The competition between these two terms will be decided by how quickly one of them is generally adopted.

All such competitions induce anxiety in many writers and speakers because the「wrong」choice can make a speaker or writer look ridiculous. For this reason there is always a market for self-proclaimed language gurus, and every bookstore has a shelf of etiquette books that pretend all these questions are settled, although inevitably these books often disagree with one another. Publishers and their technical staffs are under no illusions; they know there is no authority outside of the social hierarchy of native speakers and writers. They also know that while accidentals can cause mischief, no degree of mere correctness can possibly constitute a style and too much anxiety about accidentals can compromise one. There were plenty of actresses in the 1920s who never had to substitute「cow」for「kee-yow,」but none of them projected the image that Louise Brooks did. She would have ruined that image, moreover, had she betrayed anxiety about getting it right.

Misunderstandings on this subject sometimes extend to people who have exceptional power to influence usage. The New York Times and The Washington Post gave coverage to Thurgood Marshall's decision to use the term「Afro-American」in a written opinion he filed in 1989 as an associate justice of the United States Supreme court.

First the eminent jurist explained his motives:「I spent most of my life fighting to get Negro spelled with a capital N. . . . Then people started saying black and I never liked it.」

Then he revealed how greatly he underrated his own authority:「Justice Marshall said he chose Afro-American rather than African American, now gaining currency, because ‘Afro-American is in the dictionary and the other one isn't.'「

Montaigne déjà avait trouvé en sa Gascogne et dans sa tour de Montaigne, un style de génie, mais tout individuel et qui ne tirait pas à conséquence. Pascal a trouvé un style à la fois individuel, de génie, qui a sa marque et que nul ne peut lui prendre, et un style aussi de forme générale, logique et régulière, qui fait loi, et auquel tous peuvent et doivent plus ou moins se rapporter: il a établi la prose française.

[Montaigne already had found in his Gascony and in his tower at Montaigne a style of genius, but a completely individual one that drew no followers. Pascal discovered a style at once individual, marked by genius, completely his own, that no one could take from him, and yet a general style, logical and regular, with the force of law, one that everyone can and should more or less adopt as a standard: he established French prose.]

— Sainte-Beuve, Port-Royal

Classic style, in the hands of its master practitioners, can be distinctive without appearing to be personal. Its implicit claim is that it does not depend upon the writer's personality for its effects. Sainte-Beuve points to this feature of classic style in comparing two great French writers, Montaigne and Pascal.

It was, of course, the French educational bureaucracy in the nineteenth century that made Pascal's style something like「law」and decided that he had not merely demonstrated the powers of a style but「established French prose.」Still, the apparent paradox — the claim that Pascal's style is individual yet available to everyone and even more or less obligatory — is a consequence of the classic stand on truth, presentation, scene, cast, thought and language. Pascal is a reasonable model for pedagogical purposes precisely because his style is a general one. While no student is likely to achieve Pascal's level of mastery, the great usefulness of his style as a model is precisely that it is possible for almost anyone to achieve a working competence without needing either Pascal's exceptional abilities or his exceptional passion and sense of purpose. What is personal to him lies outside the style, for his principal achievement, on this view, is more in the nature of a discovery about writing than a written expression of his own thought. Classic style disavows superior powers of introspection or exceptional personal insight or exceptional personal commitment; it never abandons the implicit claim to be merely presenting what the reader, once properly situated, can verify. Its seventeenth-century French practitioners employed the style in a variety of literary forms: in personal correspondence, in books of maxims and moral portraits, in at least one notable work of fiction, and in the memoir literature that is a feature of seventeenth-century French prose. The memoirs of both La Rochefoucauld and his rival, the Cardinal de Retz, share all the essential marks of the style. While their observations are unmistakably their own, they never ask the reader to accept what they say on the strength of something that can belong only to them. Like all classic writers, they do all the work, they do it invisibly, and they suggest that, accidents of opportunity aside, the reader could do precisely what they are doing. As one nineteenth-century editor of Retz put it,

[L]a langue n'était évidemment pour lui [Retz] qu'un moyen de rendre sa pensée, ou plutôt de présenter habilement, sous un certain jour, les hommes, les événements, et en particulier ses propres actions.

[Language is evidently for him {Retz} only a way of presenting his thought, or better of ably presenting, on any given day, people, events, and especially his own actions.]

Dem schreibenden Herzog bietet sich die Erinnerung an Menschen und Auftritte mit so drängender Gewalt und so viel Fülle des Einzelnen, daß seine Feder kaum mit zukommen scheint, und er ist offenbar vollkommen uberzeugt, daß alles, was ihm einfällt, für das Ganze unentberhrlich ist und sich auch ins Ganze einordnen wird, ohne daß er im voraus dafür Sorge tragen muß.

[As Saint-Simon writes, memories of people and scenes come to him so urgently and with such an abundance of details that his pen seems hardly able to keep up with it all; and he is apparently quite convinced that everything that occurs to him is indispensable for the whole and that it will find its proper place there without his having to prepare for it in advance.]

— Erich Auerbach, Mimesis

Je le voyais bec à bec entre deux bougies, n'y ayant du tout que la largeur de la table entre deux. J'ai décrit ailleurs son horrible physionomie. Eperdu tout à coup par l'ouïe et par la vue, je fus saisi, tandis qu'il parlait, de ce que c'était qu'un jésuite, qui, par son néant personnel et avoué, ne pouvait rien espérer pour sa famille, ni, par son état et par ses vœux, pour soi-même, pas même une pomme ni un coup de vin plus que les autres; qui par son âge touchait au moment de rendre compte à Dieu, et qui, de propos délibéré et amené avec grand artifice, allait mettre l'Etat et la religion dans la plus terrible combustion, et ouvrir la persécution la plus affreuse pour des questions qui ne lui faisaient rien, et qui ne touchaient que l'honneur de leur école de Molina. Ses profondeurs, les violences qu'il me montra, tout cela me jeta en un tel (sic) extase, que tout à coup je me pris à lui dire en l'interrompant:「Mon Père, quel âge avez-vous?」Son extrême surprise, car je le regardais de tous mes yeux, qui la virent se peindre sur son visage, rappela mes sens. . . . [I saw him face to face between two candles, having nothing but the width of the table between the two of us. I have elsewhere described his horrible physiognomy. Bewildered suddenly by hearing and sight, I was seized, while he talked, with what a Jesuit was, who, through his personal and avowed nothingness, could hope nothing for his family, nor, through his condition and his vows, for himself, not even an apple or a drink of wine more than the others; who, through his age, was close to the moment of rendering his account to God, and who, of deliberate purpose, and brought about with great artifice, was going to put the State and religion into the most terrible combustion, and inaugurate the most frightful persecution for questions which meant nothing to him and which affected only the honor of their school of Molina. His depths, the violences which he showed me, all this threw me into such an ecstasy that I suddenly found myself saying, interrupting him:「Father, how old are you?」His extreme surprise, for I was looking at him with all my eyes, which saw it painted on his face, called back my senses. . . .]

— Saint-Simon, as quoted in Erich Auerbach, Mimesis

In Mimesis, the Romance philologist Erich Auerbach offers a series of virtuoso stylistic analyses of the type known as explication de texte. The passages he has selected are arranged in a chronological sequence beginning with Homer and the sacred scripture of ancient Israel and ending with selections from Virginia Woolf and Marcel Proust. In keeping with the subject of his book, whose subtitle in its English translation is「The Representation of Reality in Western Literature,」the sequence of passages he discusses is conceived as an evolutionary progress of representational styles that depend increasingly for their effects on an evident asymmetry between writer and reader in their model cast. Here the classic style of Retz and Pascal is seen as formulaic and superficial compared with the next element of the sequence — the inimitably idiosyncratic performance of Saint-Simon, whose representations of individuals at the court of Louis XIV are incomparable not merely for their individuality and complexity but also for the drama of the writer's performance. Saint-Simon's prose is not a window but something like an acrobat's high wire, a platform for fantastic feats obviously beyond the reader's competence and just barely within the writer's. The writer is not so much competent as he is pushing the limits of his art, his language repeatedly tottering on the edge of syntactic incoherence but frequently achieving striking results that have the air of being part inspired genius, part happy accident.

Auerbach's claims for Saint-Simon are grounded in a conviction that the truth of human existence is very far from clear and simple; it is rather unknown and unknowable to any one individual, but reveals itself in historical processes, the dialectic counterpart of the individual projects that, seen as a sequence, unwittingly and progressively reveal what we know of human truth.

When historical particulars are seen not in the classic perspective as occasions for the revelation of eternal truth but rather in this romantic perspective as moments in the unfolding of a truth progressively revealed in history, classic style of presentation can be compared unfavorably to romantic styles of representation. This is exactly what Auerbach does.

His comparison of classic and romantic styles predictably reverses classic values. Its opening note is the preference for inspiration over rational order: the unpredictable insight that occurs in the very act of composition is preferred to the classic pattern of thought preceding speech. For a romantic like Auerbach, deliberate thought as a principle of expression guarantees a superficial and false vision; inspiration in the course of writing is a badge of authenticity and truth:「Everything that occurs to [Saint-Simon] in connection with his subject, he throws into his sentences just as it happens to come to mind, in full confidence that it will somehow fit together in unity and clearness.」For Auerbach, it is not a demerit that Saint-Simon may not see this unity and clearness, that he may merely serve as an inspired conduit to make it available to a future reader.

Classic style values the order of rational analysis as being reliable and not idiosyncratic; it distrusts the order of sensation and emotion as being unreliable, idiosyncratic, and often demonstrably wrong. Auerbach inverts this scale of values:

Saint-Simon obtains his most profound insights not by rationally analyzing ideas and problems but by an empiricism applied to whatever sensory phenomenon happens to confront him and pursued to the point of penetrating to the existential. In contrast (to mention an obvious example) the Jesuit priest of the first [of Pascal's] Lettres provinciales was quite clearly stylized on the basis of a preceding rational study.

This preference for following sensation as it brings unpredictable glimpses of truth is sensible on the romantic view that truth is elusive and never to be seen whole. If truth will not sit still for rational analysis, but comes only in suggestive fragmentary vision, then the writer must always write in fear that at any second whatever fragments of it have come to him will slip away. This intermittent and unpredictable pulse of revelation produces a romantic urgency to capture both the sensation and what it may suggest. This model is unthinkable in classic style, since truth is fully visible to any competent person and cannot slip away. Classic truth can never evaporate. As a result, classic presentation is characterized by calm and ease — a calm and ease that for Auerbach is a hallmark of complacency and self-deception.

[T]he urgency of an inner impulse gives [Saint-Simon's] language something unusual, at times something violent and immoderately expressive, which runs counter to the ease and pleasantness which appealed to the taste of the time.

Auerbach conceives of the truth of human nature as consisting of「profondeurs opaques」: perception of truth will necessarily come in exceptional fragments at exceptional moments to exceptional people. It will come when the observer does not expect it. Saint-Simon, for example, in the middle of a conversation with the Jesuit, Père Tellier, is seized, according to Auerbach, by a revelation of「the essential nature of any strictly organized solidaritarian community.」This conception of truth is of course entirely foreign to classic style. On Auerbach's view, it is a sign of integrity for a writer to present fragments of opaque profundities incompletely perceived as they offer themselves to the individual genius. On the classic view, such a presentation can only be definitive proof of failure. In classic style, the expression is a presentation of the result of thought. Writing that does not meet this description is incompetent by classic standards, but superior for Auerbach:

The non-fictitious, non-precogitated quality of his material, its being drawn from immediate appearances, gives Saint-Simon a depth of life which even the great decades' most important portrayers of character, Molière for example or La Bruyère, could not achieve.

In the classic view, this judgment is simply unintelligible because the evidence offered to support the claim seems to be evidence against it. This judgment has, in the classic view, the same logic as「Guesses are better than accurate knowledge because they are more personal.」

Individual genius as Auerbach describes it consists of fragmentary and unpredictable visions. The writer cannot control them. Anything that can be controlled in a rational fashion is superficial artifice, not profound truth. Genius is charismatic — blessed with prophetic, inspirational moments of vision, much as E. B. White was momentarily blessed with a glimpse into the nature of time as he recorded his impressions of the girl riding her horse around the circus ring. Neither Saint-Simon nor E. B. White can count on such revelations. They may never come to these writers again; they may never come to the reader at all. What is virtue for Auerbach is egoistical delusion for classic style.

Jane Austen's unforgettable presentation of Mr. Collins in Pride and Prejudice — regular and deliberate as it is — will inevitably appear to be on Auerbach's scale of values facile and superficial.

Mr. Collins was not a sensible man, and the deficiency of nature had been but little assisted by education or society; the greatest part of his life having been spent under the guidance of an illiterate and miserly father; and though he belonged to one of the universities, he had merely kept the necessary terms, without forming at it any useful acquaintance. The subjection in which his father had brought him up, had given him originally great humility of manner, but it was now a good deal counteracted by the self-conceit of a weak head, living in retirement, and the consequential feelings of early and unexpected prosperity. A fortunate chance had recommended him to Lady Catherine de Bourgh when the living of Hunsford was vacant; and the respect which he felt for her high rank, and his veneration for her as his patroness, mingling with a very good opinion of himself, of his authority as a clergyman, and his rights as a rector, made him altogether a mixture of pride and obsequiousness, self-importance and humility.

From the classic perspective, the virtue of Jane Austen's presentation is that once she has shown you where to look, her appraisal of Mr. Collins can be independently「verified」by any reader (just as it is by her characters). Saint-Simon gives a virtuoso presentation of Père Tellier and recounts his insight into the nature of the Jesuits, but while someone else might be able to verify Saint-Simon's presentation of the Jesuit of horrible physiognomy, no one else could follow the route from the physical description of one Jesuit to the revelation of the essential nature of the order. This route from the impression of one individual to a presumed knowledge of a whole community is precisely what Jane Austen means by「prejudice.」Pride and Prejudice turns on the representation of Elizabeth Bennet's repentance for having followed this route to self-deception. What is revelation in Saint-Simon is prejudice in Jane Austen.

Mimesis is a fable about the evolutionary history of style in which later steps in the process are necessarily superior to earlier steps. It is possible for Auerbach to see a particular writer such as Saint-Simon as an almost miraculous mutation exhibiting the shape of the future:「In his level of style, Saint-Simon is a precursor of modern and ultra-modern forms of conceiving and representing life.」Truth, for Auerbach, is not the property of an individual, indeed not essentially available to individuals: it resides in dialectical process — the historicist actions of epochs rather than the historical actions of individuals. The value of the individual writer consists in his degree of participation in that dialectical process. The individual genius of a great writer, then, consists in his seeing through immediate persons and events to the truth of the evolutionary historicist progression. Saint-Simon's excellence consists exactly in his being the first to glimpse a higher stage of epochal truth, as Auerbach remarks in his analysis of Saint-Simon's presentation of the duchesse de Lorge:

We must wait until the late nineteenth century and indeed actually until the twentieth, before we again find in European literature a similar level of tone, a synthesis of a human being which is so entirely free from traditional harmonizing, which presses so unswervingly on from the random data of the phenomenon itself to the ultimate depths of existence.

On such a view, it is possible for Auerbach to place agency in epochs and their sequence rather than in individuals; to write, for example, of the「ease and pleasantness that appealed to the taste of the time,」as if times have tastes, rather than individuals. In Auerbach's formulation, an earlier taste is necessarily a less adequate taste. Although earlier tastes may survive into the future to be contemporary with later tastes, they will occupy lower levels on the historicist Great Chain of Adequacy. Auerbach implies that, luckily, the taste for ease and pleasantness lies now in our evolutionary past; it is nearly unimaginable for us now — who live higher on the evolutionary scale of style — to understand the tastes that previous styles created.

Since Auerbach's measure of stylistic maturity values writing to the extent that it penetrates through local and individual human purpose to historicist truth, he naturally discounts the individual purposes of writers as impediments to the representation of truth. The more a writer includes and the less he selects according to his own purpose, the more likely it is that his writing will touch upon those truths that are essentially beyond him. The less he allows his writing to be controlled by「precogitated」individual purpose, the more likely it is that truth will work though him as its conduit. The result, in Auerbach, is a principled blindness to the individual purposes of writers he regards as superficial in comparison with Saint-Simon. Pascal's presentation of a Jesuit in the first of the Lettres provinciales, for example, is in the service of classic polemic; Pascal has no need or reason to present a rich and randomly detailed description of an individual Jesuit. But for Auerbach, Pascal's principle of presentation, efficiently governed as it is by his immediate purpose, makes it unlikely that truth, which always lies beyond local purpose, will work through him.

Pascal, like all classic writers, speaks for himself; writers that Auerbach admires hardly speak at all; it is the historical age that speaks through them. The voice of Auerbach's individual genius is not his own; it is the voice of Hegelian historical progress.

Since Auerbach's history presumes to know and to reveal the one ultimate purpose of writing, it can value one style absolutely above all others. Learned and inclusive as Auerbach is, his history is an ideological justification of the universal superiority of that single style, one that has not yet nor ever will be fully manifest in any text by any writer.

Classic style, a general style suitable for presenting the truth of anything, conceived as discrete and self-contained, has no continuing evolutionary history. It can be found in its perfect form in Thucydides, in Madame de Sévigné, in Jane Austen, in A. J. Liebling. It is not the style to which all previous writing aspires. Classic style is one style among many mature and consistent styles. Its virtues follow from its particular stand on the elements of style. They include the clarity and simplicity that come from matching language to thought on the motive of truth. Other styles have other virtues.
