TWO The Museum

「Tufted Titmouse, including Black-crested Titmouse」

(Parus bicolor)

Titmice are social birds and, especially in winter, join with small mixed flocks of chickadees, nuthatches, kinglets, creepers, and the smaller woodpeckers. Although a frequent visitor at feeders, it is not as tame or confiding as the chickadees. It often clings to the bark of trees and turns upside down to pick spiders and insects from the underside of a twig or leaf. The「Black-crested Titmouse」of Texas was until recently considered a separate species.

VOICE: Its commonest call, sung year-round and carrying a considerable distance, is a whistled series of four to eight notes sounding like Peter-Peter repeated over and over.

「Northern Shrike」

(Lanius excubitor)

Unusual among songbirds, shrikes prey on small birds and rodents, catching them with the bill and sometimes impaling them on thorns or barbed wire for storage. Like other northern birds that depend on rodent populations, the Northern Shrike movements are cyclical, becoming more abundant in the South when northern rodent populations are low. At times they hunt from an open perch, where they sit motionless until prey appears; at other times they hover in the air ready to pounce on anything that moves.

— John Bull and John Farrand, Jr., The Audubon Society

Field Guide to North American Birds, Eastern Region

A field guide, in its stand on truth, presentation, scene, cast, thought, and language, fits the classic stand on the elements of style perfectly. Its implied model is one person presenting observations to another, who is in a position to verify them by direct observation.

The reader is not in a library doing research, but in the field looking and listening. Since the field guide assumes a scene in which the reader is in the field, it cannot be written in a style that requires study or rereading. It strives to be brief and efficient. It seeks to present the birds it describes specifically and precisely enough for the reader to recognize them.

The writing in a good field guide is certainly the product of deliberation and revision but sounds like ideal spontaneous speech, as if an accomplished companion in the field wanted to tell you something. There is a symmetry between writer and reader: although the writer knows more about the subject than the reader, the reader would know exactly what the writer knows had he seen what the writer has seen in the past. And the guide's purpose is to put the reader in a position to achieve that parity.

The writer needs nothing from the reader. The writer's purpose is purely the presentation of truth. Neither writer nor reader has a job to do. The writer writes and the reader reads not for the sake of some external task — solving a problem, making money, winning a case, getting a rebate, selling insurance, fixing a machine — but rather for the sake of the subject — in this case, the birds — and for the sake of being united in recognizing the truth of this subject. The writer takes the pose of full knowledge, since nothing could be more irksome to someone in the field than a passage clotted with hedges about the writer's impotence.

The entries in the Audubon Society Field Guide to North American Birds, Eastern Region, come as close to classic style in its pure form as anything we have found. In classic style, the model is one person talking to another to present something they both can perceive. A field guide does not perfectly coincide with that model since it is writing, not speech, and the two people are not literally together, but otherwise it fits the classic model closely. Field guides are particularly remarkable for their unfailing refusal to draw attention to their prose. A phrase such as「not as tame or confiding」in the presentation of the tufted titmouse or a sentence like「Unusual among songbirds, shrikes prey on small birds and rodents, catching them with the bill and sometimes impaling them on thorns or barbed wire for storage」in the presentation of the northern shrike is a masterpiece of expression, but refuses to acknowledge that it is anything other than the one inevitable way to present the subject. The prose suggests the same clarity and inevitability as the complex and wonderful but unambiguous and uncontrived presence of the species it describes. There is no more suggestion of deliberation or effort in writing about the tufted titmouse or the northern shrike than there is in seeing one. Writing is assimilated to seeing. There is no more struggle in writing than there is in seeing.

The passages in the Audubon Field Guide assume without hesitation that of course the reader is interested in birds. All details are presented at an equal level of importance. The entire passage is in close focus. The entry for the hairy woodpecker notes that it destroys insects such as wood-boring beetles,「which it extracts from holes with its barbed tongue. Like other woodpeckers, it hammers on a dead limb as part of its courtship ceremony and to proclaim its territory.」The speaker shows not the slightest diffidence or embarrassment about reporting that the call note of the hairy woodpecker「is a sharp, distinctive peek,」or that the western meadowlark and the eastern meadowlark「are so similar that it was not until 1844 that Audubon noticed the difference and named the western bird neglecta because it had been overlooked for so long.」The writer takes the stand that he is simply presenting truth and is being neither cute nor partisan when he reports that「The song of the Western Meadowlark is often heard on Hollywood sound tracks even when the movie setting is far from the bird's range.」There is nothing self-conscious in his matching of language to thought, so there is no hint of fear or shyness in the way he puts his vocabulary to work in descriptions, such as the following account of the western meadowlark's call:「rich, flute-like jumble of gurgling notes, usually descending the scale; very different from the Eastern Meadowlark's series of simple, plaintive whistles.」The speaker never overshoots or undershoots, but always hits his mark. The tone is as it must be. There is nothing for the writer to be defensive about.

「Dragoon Tie」

In the late 16th century, a European mounted soldier who fought as a light cavalryman on attack and as a dismounted infantryman on defense was called a「dragoon.」The term was derived from his weapon, a type of carbine or short musket called the「dragoon.」In the early wars of Frederick II the Great of Prussia in the 18th century,「dragoon」referred to the medium cavalry. The light cavalry of the British army, for the most part, was called「light dragoon」in the 18th and 19th centuries. The term and function disappeared, as did the cavalry, in the 20th century.

The dragoon image used on our exclusive silk twill tie is taken from a design on a 17th-century pewter cap ornament in the Military History exhibit in the National Museum of American History.

— The text of a small card presenting the dragoon tie in the gift shop of the National Museum of American History, 1991

An actual scene is unclassic when the writer wants or needs something from the reader. The classic writer never explicitly argues for the reader's agreement, never overtly solicits a reader's vote or ostensibly engages in salesmanship at any level. He does not write to convince his reader of anything or to lead his reader to any action; he does not write for any practical purpose at all. He is simply presenting an interesting truth. It may be that certain judgments or actions must fall out as a natural consequence of this truth, but in such cases, truth alone is sufficient to ensure the judgment or the action.

Writers in professional or business worlds who want something from readers normally use practical style. Technical manuals, sales pitches, political arguments, undergraduate essays, computer instructions, op-ed pieces, and the great range of prose that attempts to get our attention so it can push us and pull us is typically written in at least an attempt at practical style.

There are reasons for this. When someone wants something from us, we are not necessarily disposed to listen, and certainly not disposed to listen to every detail. Practical style is designed to allow skimming and to excuse the reader as much as possible from having to make an effort. If the writer knows that the reader is plowing through hundreds of similar documents, is weary and perhaps even bored, is skimming the writing and for reasons of either incapacity or disposition simply cannot be made to pay attention to the details of the writing, practical style is almost a necessity.

Yet classic style can be extraordinarily effective in cases where the actual scene conflicts with the model scene of classic style. Classic style is a general style of presentation and can present absolutely anything. Adopting the model scene of classic style can have the effect of distracting the reader from the actual scene by suggesting the much more pleasant and distinguished model scene assumed by classic style. This substitution, all alone, can accomplish the writer's actual purposes at one stroke. In the model scene of classic style, someone is simply presenting truth spontaneously, succinctly, and informally. If this model scene can hide the actual scene — which involves some potential conflict of interest between writer and reader, or some reason the reader might not care to give her full attention voluntarily, or some effort by the writer to apply pressure to the reader, or indeed anything other than full disinterested participation by writer and reader in the truth of what is being presented — then the writer has accomplished his goals not by achieving them but rather by assuming a scene in which they are already achieved.

The most persuasive of all rhetorical stances is to write as if one is not trying to persuade at all but simply presenting truth. The most seductive of all rhetorical stances is to write as if of course the reader is interested in what is being presented, as if the issue could never possibly arise. In general, the best rhetorical stance, if one can get away with it, is to speak as if no rhetorical purposes are involved. Properly adopted, this stance accomplishes at the outset the actual rhetorical goals: the reader is interested and persuaded without ever stopping to realize that any effort has been made to interest or persuade her. This rhetorical strategy can be remarkably effective in situations where practical style or oratorical style is more common. It is also much more pleasant than the labor of practical or oratorical style. It flatters the reader by making her an equal, and relaxes the reader by making her part of a disinterested conversation about something really interesting.

Classic style judiciously used to mask practical goals can bring distinction to its subject, its writer, and its reader. The reader plowing through one hundred memos written in practical style may welcome being addressed in classic style, which adopts the stance that reading it is not part of anybody's actual job, but rather something that the reader is interested in and would have no reason to resist.

The exhibit presenting the Smithsonian dragoon tie is an example of classic style used to sell something, but it has one glaring flaw that shows the difference between classic style and practical advertising style. The phrase「our exclusive」is wrong on two counts. First, the classic writer speaks for himself. He does not acknowledge that he is speaking as the mouthpiece of an institution. Instead, he is having a conversation with an equal. Second, the word「exclusive,」although it technically means that the tie can be bought only from the Smithsonian, comes from the lexicon of sales, and calls up immediately in full force the model scene in which a seller is trying to sell something to a customer.

However, if the phrase「our exclusive」were simply replaced with the word「this,」the result would be a passage in classic style. It pretends to be speech. Its purpose is to present an interesting truth. It takes the pose of full knowledge. Someone is simply telling you something interesting about what you are looking at. Everything is in close focus. It assumes a symmetry between writer and reader. Although skillfully written, it refuses to draw attention to the prose. A phrase like「as did the cavalry,」which is an extremely felicitous and understated way of presenting the historical situation in a brief and unforgettable parenthesis, is used as if it came to the writer without deliberation. Of course the reader is interested in the tie, its details, the image on the tie, the materials out of which it is made, the history surrounding it. It follows naturally that the reader might want to have this tie. That the writer is actually trying to get the reader to do something as vulgar as buy the tie is never allowed to surface.

A single revision, substituting「this」for「our exclusive,」turns this passage into classic style.「This」and「our exclusive」are both instances of what syntacticians call「determiner phrases.」The substitution changes nothing at the「phrase-grammatical」or「text-grammatical」level but changes the style, demonstrating that classic style cannot be defined, or distinguished from other styles, by listing its「phrase-grammatical」or「text-grammatical」features. Consequently, a writer cannot be taught classic style by being taught to follow certain patterns of「phrase grammar」or「text grammar.」That is why this book is not an instruction manual in such grammatical procedures. Rather, it is a presentation of the concept of style, the elements of style, and the classic stand on the elements of style. The reader who considers the classic stand will come to see, for himself and through the demonstrations of this museum, that some surface features may derive in certain cases from the classic stand on the elements of style. But these surface features do not constitute the style.

Known locally as Acadiana and more widely as Cajun country, this isolated, dank area is dominated by descendants of French refugees and freed slaves.

— Los Angeles Times, 28 August 1992

Hemorrhoids are actually varicose veins in the rectum.

— First sentence of an anonymous brochure in a medical clinic, 1992

We include this exhibit to suggest the ease with which classic style can be used to present anything. Because classic style is a style of distinction and was used by its seventeenth-century French masters usually for aristocratic concerns, it might mistakenly be thought of as somehow reserved for aristocratic subjects. Quite the contrary. The first exhibit is a front-page report about a current event, the landing of Hurricane Andrew on the Louisiana Gulf Coast. The writer takes the pose of full knowledge and assumes that of course the reader is interested in the subject. All details are in close focus:「Known locally as Acadiana.」

The second exhibit is the opening sentence of an anonymous brochure about everyday medical problems. The writer writes as if his subject must manifestly be important to the reader, as if he is talking about the mystery of the Holy Ghost or the irregular evolution of great wine.「Actually」presupposes that the reader is of course already interested in this subject.

The ancients wished to explain away the scandal of Homer's gods.

— Michael Murrin, The Allegorical Epic: Essays in Its Rise and Decline

Physics has a history of synthesizing many phenomena into a few theories.

— Richard P. Feynman, QED: The Strange Theory of Light and Matter

Reflexive principles are sought by analyzing a problem or a subject into a whole sufficiently homogeneous and independent to permit solution of the problem or statement of the subject.

— Richard McKeon,「Philosophy and Method」

Perception has some basic patterns. In one of the most fundamental, we orient to a stimulus and then inspect its finer details. The eye is structured to serve this pattern: our peripheral vision is not very sharp, but it allows us to pick out what we want to pay attention to; we then orient our heads so as to bring the stimulus into the central area of the retina, or fovea, which is a more sensitive receptor, suited to inspecting fine details.

This perceptual pattern is basic not only to all our senses but also to our understanding of abstract concepts. We think of conceptual inspection as structured by it: we pick out a concept, orient to it, then inspect its finer details. This is why we routinely say things like,「Let us now turn our attention to the bond market,」or「He would have seen what was going on if he had bothered to look around.」

Since classic style presents a subject to its reader, it is not surprising that it has an affinity for basic patterns of perception and inspection. Often, the classic writer will view her task as getting the reader to pick out a particular abstract subject, orient to it, and then pay attention to its finer details. It is not uncommon for a classic passage or sentence to mirror this pattern at the grammatical level. When a classic passage gives us a title — The Tufted Titmouse, The Northern Shrike, The Dragoon Tie — followed by text, we can understand it immediately through this image schema: the title lets us pick something out and orient to it; the text will present the fine points.

The first two sentences in this exhibit are structured by this basic image schema of presentation. Conceptually, each wishes to present a subject — the ancients or physics — and then to make a fine observation about that subject. Grammatically, each sentence first refers to the subject and then makes a predication specific to that subject.

The use of this image schema will not ensure a classic style. Suppose these sentences were,「The ancients wished to acquire glory」and「Physics has a history of trying to explain reality.」Both of these sentences orient the reader to a subject and then try to pick out a detail. Both take a pose of full knowledge and avoid distracting hedges. Both have as their model scene one person talking to another. Both are patterned on voice rather than writing. And so on. But they are deficient as classic prose, because classic predication involves fine conceptual distinctions, articulated in a precise vocabulary.

Classic presentation lives and dies by fine conceptual distinctions. The distinctions drawn in our first two exhibits, by Michael Murrin and Richard Feynman, appear to have been carefully chosen. Both convey the impression that to be able to make these fine choices and careful conceptual distinctions, the writer must have acquired a vast wealth of knowledge. They do not draw attention to the learning of the writer, and they do not assume that the reader would have failed to see these truths if he had the writer's experience, but they do convey the impression that these presentations can only be made after a great deal of personal experience, although only the appropriate truth, not the experience, is presented.

The first two sentences of this exhibit risk trying to state the essence of something immensely complicated. Each needs its refined observation. Lacking it, they would be no different from such sentences as「In the ancient world, everybody believed the gods decided everything,」or「Sex has a way of making you feel good」: texts that express shallow knowledge or repeat clichés without authority.

The third selection, from Richard McKeon, is disorienting even though, using conventional stylistic checklists, it is not easy to see why. Manuals of usage usually discourage the passive voice, but putting this sentence into active voice will not make it easier to read. McKeon, the model for the Chairman in Robert Pirsig's Zen and the Art of Motorcycle Maintenance, often wrote prose that, like Jeremy Bentham's, had to be solved rather than read. Some people thought the quality of his writing helped to create his reputation — narrowly based but tenaciously held — for profundity. When a philosopher is difficult to read, some readers ascribe the difficulty of his literary style to the difficulty of the subject. They expect to encounter thoughts inaccessible to ordinary thinkers in language inaccessible to ordinary readers. Feynman thought he could make quantum mechanics accessible to general audiences; McKeon could make The Hound of the Baskervilles as inaccessible as quantum mechanics. But whatever readers may think about the quality of his thought, reading a few pages of McKeon generally leaves them feeling as if they have been caught in a whirlpool. The reason for this feeling of vertigo is that McKeon was one of those rare writers whose sentences do not respect normal patterns of human perception. This one seems to invite us to understand it through the normal perceptual and conceptual pattern of orientation to a clear subject and then investigation of its fine details, but the reader who tries to understand it in this fashion will find that the subject of presentation never seems to settle down. The sentence seems to ask for repeated orientation with no inspection of detail, giving it a peculiarly confusing circular figure.

Marquette had solemnly contracted, on the feast of the Immaculate Conception, that if the Virgin would permit him to discover the great river, he would name it Conception, in her honor. He kept his word. In that day, all explorers travelled with an outfit of priests. De Soto had twenty-four with him. La Salle had several, also. The expeditions were often out of meat, and scant of clothes, but they always had the furniture and other requisites for the mass; they were always prepared, as one of the quaint chroniclers of the time phrased it, to「explain hell to the salvages.」

When I was a boy, there was but one permanent ambition among my comrades in our village on the west bank of the Mississippi River. That was, to be a steamboatman. We had transient ambitions of other sorts, but they were only transient. When a circus came and went, it left us all burning to become clowns; the first negro minstral show that came to our section left us all suffering to try that kind of life; now and then we had a hope that if we lived and were good, God would permit us to be pirates. These ambitions faded out, each in its turn; but the ambition to be a steamboatman always remained.

— Mark Twain, Life on the Mississippi

Classic prose is a window to its subject. This subject is never displaced by the writer. When the subject is a tufted titmouse, a dragoon tie, Hurricane Andrew, physics, the ancients, or anything that could not possibly be mistaken for the writer, the distinction is simple. When the subject is an event in which the writer has had a part, the distinction is subtler. This distinction is standard in classic literary journalism, in which the writer often reports a scene he experienced: presenting his own role may be part of presenting the scene. When A. J. Liebling writes about learning to eat in Between Meals, he does so from the experiences of a young American university student sampling Paris restaurants instead of going to class. When Twain writes about life on the Mississippi, he does so from the experiences of a boy raised on the Mississippi who imagined becoming a pilot on the Mississippi and who in fact became a pilot on the Mississippi.

Twain the boy and Twain the cub pilot are part of the subject; they are not displaced by Twain the writer. We do not start reading a book that purports to present life on the Mississippi and soon find ourselves mired in a discussion of the psychological turmoil undergone by the writer as he tries to recollect his youth before the Civil War.

When a classic writer presents his own experience, it is neither private nor merely personal. The experiences Twain presents are not private: had you been there, you would have seen what he saw, and his purpose is to put you in a position to see exactly that. It is only accidental that you cannot now visit antebellum Hannibal, Missouri to see for yourself. Similarly, these experiences are not merely personal. You are expected to recognize the truth of childhood ambition he presents and to confirm it from your own experience, or from other people's reports.

In this way, Twain the writer and Twain the possessor of entirely personal experiences are never allowed to displace the subject — life on the Mississippi. Twain the boy and Twain the steamboatman are part of that subject and are presented as such.

Twain was a deeply opinionated man, and in some of his books he argues with an unclassic interest or aggression, but Life on the Mississippi is a work of classic disinterest and disguised assertion. The writer takes the pose that life on the Mississippi is interesting and it occurs to him to tell you about it, spontaneously. He writes as if there is nothing to argue about, only truth that the reader will of course recognize once put in a position to see it. In the wicked little history about explorers and priests, Twain passes off his assertions as mere observations. At his best, Twain is a complete master of such disguise, as in the following passage, which actually argues that those who send an invading army cannot understand at a distance what it is like to be invaded. Twain neither asserts nor doubts his central thesis. He simply presents the manifest differences in outlook between Northerners and Southerners:

In the North one hears the war mentioned, in social conversation, once a month; sometimes as often as once a week; but as a distinct subject for talk, it has long ago been relieved of duty. There are sufficient reasons for this. Given a dinner company of six gentlemen today, it can easily happen that four of them — and possibly five — were not in the field at all. So the chances are four to two, or five to one, that the war will at no time during the evening become the topic of conversation; and the chances are still greater that if it become the topic it will remain so but a little while. If you add six ladies to the company, you have added six people who saw so little of the dread realities of the war that they ran out of talk concerning them years ago, and now would soon weary of the war topic if you brought it up.

The case is very different in the South. There, every man you meet was in the war; and every lady you meet saw the war. The war is the great chief topic of conversation. The interest in it is vivid and constant; the interest in other topics is fleeting. Mention of the war will wake up a dull company and set their tongues going, when nearly any other topic would fail. In the South, the war is what A.D. is elsewhere: they date from it. All day long you hear things「placed」as having happened since the waw; or du'in' the waw; or befo' the waw; or right aftah the waw. It shows how intimately every individual was visited, in his own person, by that tremendous episode. It gives the inexperienced stranger a better idea of what a vast and comprehensive calamity invasion is than he can ever get by reading books at the fireside.

A portrait now in the possession of the descendants of the Kiry clan shows Terukatsu sitting cross-legged on a tiger skin, fully clad in armor with a European breastplate, black-braided shoulder plates, taces and fur boots. His helmet is surmounted by enormous, sweeping horns, like a water buffalo's. He holds a tasseled baton of command in his right hand; his left hand is spread so wide on his thigh that the thumb reaches the scabbard of his sword. If he were not wearing armor, one could get some idea of his physique; dressed as he is, only the face is visible. It is not uncommon to see likenesses of heroes from the Period of Civil Wars clad in full armor, and Terukatsu's is very similar to those of Honda Heihachir and Sakakibara Yasumasa that so often appear in history books. They all give an impression of great dignity and severity, but at the same time there is an uncomfortable stiffness and formality in the way they square their shoulders.

— Junichir Tanizaki, The Secret History of the Lord of

Musashi, translated by Anthony H. Chambers

The classic writer is distinguished by the fineness and accuracy of his sight. Often this sight is literally visual — as when Tanizaki picks out the detail of the left hand in the portrait of Terukatsu. Classic style extends the domain of sight to include all things that are perceptible through the senses or through reason. Tanizaki moves seamlessly from observing the visual details of the helmet, breastplate, and tasseled baton of command to observing the invisible: dignity, severity, formality, and uncomfortable stiffness; conventionally heroic posture; and the cultural and historical frame. We cannot see heroism, cultural moments, or severity in the same way we can see a hand, but classic writers assume that we see them in the same way. The truth Tanizaki recognizes and presents is conceived as public: anyone not blind looking at the painting can see the hand and its unusual distension, once it is pointed out. Similarly, anyone not mentally blind can see the cultural frame, the heroism, the stiffness, and the severity, once they are pointed out. Truth is self-evident; the classic writer need only present it accurately for the reader to recognize and verify it.

We hold these truths to be self-evident, that all men are created equal; that they are endowed by their Creator with certain unalienable rights; that among these are life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness.

— Thomas Jefferson, Declaration of Independence

Ceux qui ont le raisonnement le plus fort, et qui digèrent le mieux leurs pensées, afin de les rendre claires et intelligibles, peuvent toujours le mieux persuader ce qu'ils proposent, encore qu'ils ne parlassent que bas-breton, et qu'ils n'eussent jamais appris de rhétorique.

[Those who have the best reasoning power, and who order their thoughts best in order to make them clear and intelligible, can always argue most persuasively for what they propose, even if they speak nothing but low Breton and have never learned rhetoric.]

— René Descartes, Discours de la méthode

Truth is pure, eternal, not contingent. Jefferson's sentence hangs there like a star. It is true that his sentence is a response to a particular occasion, but he chooses to meet that occasion with something that does not depend upon occasion. What he expresses is grounded in something that was always there and that will always abide: we are endowed with it by the Creator. It is bedrock, not the result of a process. It is not achieved. It is unalienable and so cannot change.

According to Descartes, truth is not only eternal and independent of any occasion, but also potentially available to anyone — there is no principle of exclusion from knowing truth; there is only natural defect, the mental equivalent of being born blind. Being persuasive does not depend upon special techniques available only to an elite, such as the literate, the educated, the urban, the wealthy, the French. Jefferson agrees that truth is democratic. That is why he can view these truths as「self-evident,」able to be seen by all. A Breton farmer who never went to school and cannot even speak French can be more persuasive than a Parisian professor of rhetoric if his thinking is in better order.

Both sentences express a global optimism. Truth will triumph ultimately and for the most part locally. This optimism is typical of American classic style, as an American cultural attitude.

En montrant la vérité, on la fait croire.

[To present truth is to have it believed.]

— Blaise Pascal, Pensées

Truth can never be told so as to be understood, and not be believ'd.

— William Blake, The Marriage of Heaven and Hell

Pascal, like Jefferson and Descartes, implies that truth is universally accessible: to see it is to recognize it. Who is it that is made to believe truth in Pascal's sentence? The answer is anybody to whom it has been shown, anybody at all, provided that person has a full human endowment. As in Jefferson and Descartes, the perception of truth is independent of social status, education, wealth, or any other qualification. It is not exclusive. What are the local occasions upon which truth can be shown so as to be perceived? What are the particular circumstances under which it can be shown so as to be perceived? The answer is any occasion at all and under any circumstances whatsoever: truth and its perception are not contingent.

The perception of truth is immediately and completely convincing. A trick can be seen with your own eyes and still not be believed. You can see some things that you are convinced cannot possibly be true, a mirage in the desert, for example. There are many things one can see while still being suspicious of sham. But truth is not like this. To see it is to know that it is truth.

To show truth is automatically to persuade. Truth carries its own sufficient force. In this way, truth is inhuman: it is absolutely self-sufficient; it cuts through all human deficiencies; it needs no help from human beings. All it needs to be perceived is an unadulterated human presentation. As in Jefferson, truth is self-evident once shown.

Truth is perfect. It can gain nothing by being perceived. It is therefore disinterested. It has no motive for deception. It cannot present itself falsely because it does not present itself at all. Self-presentation is for human beings. Human beings are not completely visible; we come with packaging. The package is always shaped by human contingencies, temporary interests, and personal desires, and is therefore suspicious. But truth has no package. Any package given to it is false.

What underlies Pascal's statement is the notion that appropriate prose or appropriate presentation is a window: one can see right through it to truth. It is possible to get the presentation wrong, so that truth is not shown, and therefore people do not see it. The window can be warped or dirty or smoked or blocked and thus be a kind of false package. This is a failure of presentation, not a failure of truth. Truth is never deficient in force or power.

Truth cannot fail any test. It can only be misperceived and mishandled. But nothing is lethal to it. It is immortal. It survives any attempt to deface it. The instruments of perception can be perverted, as can the means of presentation, but truth cannot be perverted or even touched by such corruption. It is independent of human purpose. No one can be so perverse as not to recognize truth once it is shown, though anyone can refuse to look at it or refuse to present it.

It requires discipline, but anyone can present truth, and it often is presented. When it is presented, its effect is complete.

Blake's sentence seems a good deal like Pascal's. Stylistically, it introduces a small unexpected sophistication: truth can never be told so as to be understood and not be believed. A plain style version of this sentence is「Truth can never be told and not be believed.」

Blake's sentence introduces a refinement, a qualification, a meditation on the plain version. It introduces a pivotal conceptual refinement in simple words, transporting the assertion to a level of sophistication that the plain style shuns. Such an introduction of simply expressed conceptual refinement is characteristically classic, so Blake's sentence looks classic.

It is not. In fact, it is stylistically ambiguous. The case is complex and unresolvable. Upon consideration, Blake's sentence can be seen to wobble, but the channel between writer and reader is incomplete; the reader cannot even be sure that Blake meant it to wobble. Ostensibly, it seems to present truth as eternal, knowable, not contingent, of no particular occasion. But if we look closely, it might appear to express something quite different. It never says that it is possible to tell truth so that it can be understood at all. Such a view undercuts the classic premise. Blake's sentence makes the premise contingent upon a precondition that might or might not be fulfilled. The sentence is unclassic not because it contradicts the classic view about truth, but rather because what it presents is fluid. It can alternate between the classic and an unclassic view. What is unresolved in this fashion cannot be classic.

Blake's sentence is like a Necker cube: it contains two different figures, and we can watch it shift back and forth under inspection. It is not eternal. It is not stable. It cannot be stabilized. It looks classic, but that appearance is deceptive.

Il faut exprimer le vrai pour écrire naturellement, fortement, délicatement.

[It is necessary to express what is true in order to write naturally, powerfully, sensitively.]

— Jean de La Bruyère, Les Caractères

En vérité [le roi] est admirable et mériterait bien d'avoir d'autres historiens que deux poètes: vous savez aussi bien que moi ce qu'on dit en disant des poètes: il n'en aurait nul besoin. Il ne faudrait ni fable, ni fiction pour le mettre au-dessus des autres; il ne faudrait qu'un style droit, pur, et net. . . .

[The truth is that {the king} is admirable and would certainly merit having historians other than two poets. You know as well as I do what we mean in saying poets. He would have no need of them whatever; it would require no invention, no fiction to place him above the others; it would require only a pure style, clean and straightforward. . . .]

— Madame de Sévigné, letter to Bussy-Rabutin, 18 March 1678

These two passages, by two of the founders of French classic style, are complementary expressions of the prototypical classic stand on truth, which, in this tradition, is more compelling than any invention and is the natural object of unobstructed human intelligence. Invention requires artifice. Truth, which carries its own conviction, can dispense with sophisticated rhetorical or poetic artifice; it needs only to be presented clearly. Human intelligence recognizes truth naturally. Artifice misleads — that is its purpose. It does so by blunting the natural human sensitivity to truth, and in doing so weakens our natural capacity to perceive what is true.

Truth, then, is natural, powerful, and sensitive; the language that presents it best draws no attention to itself. When we talk about someone's personal style, or the style of someone's prose, we often refer to conspicuous attributes. When La Bruyère talks about writing「naturally,」he is thinking about a style that is anonymous in the way nature is anonymous. The format of a modern book is more natural in this sense than a codex, because, when open, a book is bilaterally symmetrical, as is the human body. A duodecimo book「fits」the hands, and while the modern book is a style of setting out a written text, it is so「natural, powerful, sensitive」that only a textual bibliographer, a binder, or an archivist is likely to be aware of it as a style of presenting a written text.

Classic style is like the form of a book; it can be noticed, but it is not conspicuous. It fits truth the way a book fits the hand. If we can imagine a machine or an extraterrestrial, with no knowledge of the human body, trying to design a format for presenting written prose to human readers, we have an image of La Bruyère's concept of the writer trying to be natural, powerful, and sensitive in the absence of truth. The mechanical or extraterrestial design will be no more natural, powerful, or sensitive to a human reader than a duodecimo volume would be to an intelligent creature with the body of an oyster.

Madame de Sévigné, one of the supreme French masters of classic style, had an exceptional literary education. She read Latin and Italian in addition to French and admired many styles of writing. She loved the allegorical epics of Tasso and Ariosto, as well as the classic prose of Pascal, La Rochefoucauld, Retz, and her close friend Madame de Lafayette. But poetry, in her view, is not a good model for the portrayal of the real virtues of a real king, because poetry「improves」the truth. In seventeenth-century French usage, poésie meant「invented story」as opposed to「true story」: its distinguishing characteristics were artificial ornament and exceptional invention. She therefore deplores the fact that Louis XIV has no one to record his victories except two poets who acted as historiographers royal in 1678 when he took Ghent, even though one of them was Racine and the other was Boileau. Madame de Sévigné is not rejecting figural forms of thought and language — metaphor, metonymy, simile, narrative, symbol, various forms of condensing and crystallizing — which are generally indispensable in thought and language and have a central role in classic style when they serve the presentation of truth. She is rejecting rather their use as embellishment, adornment, and artifice meant to「improve」truth. For Madame de Sévigné, poetic ornaments are appropriate for talking about Roland or other heroes of epic and romance, but contemporary reality needs nothing more than a pure, clean, straightforward style. Any ornament would just distract attention from truth, which needs no help, just an unimpeded view.

Three days after the first allied landing in France, I was in the wardroom of an LCIL (Landing Craft, Infantry, Large) that was bobbing in the lee of the French cruiser Montcalm off the Normandy coast. The word「large」in landing-craft designation is purely relative; the wardroom of the one I was on is seven by seven feet and contains two officers' bunks and a table with four places at it. She carries a complement of four officers, but since one of them must always be on watch there is room for a guest at the wardroom table, which is how I fitted in. The Montcalm was loosing salvos, each of which rocked our ship; she was firing at a German pocket of resistance a couple of miles from the shoreline. The suave voice of a B.B.C. announcer came over the wardroom radio:「Next in our series of impressions from the front will be a recording of an artillery barrage.」The French ship loosed off again, drowning out the recording. It was this same announcer, I think — I'm not sure, because all B.B.C. announcers sound alike — who said, a little while later,「We are now in a position to say the landings came off with surprising ease.

The Air Force and the big guns of the Navy smashed coastal defenses, and the Army occupied them.」Lieutenant Henry Rigg, United States Coast Guard Reserve, the skipper of our landing craft, looked at Long, her engineering officer, and they both began to laugh. Kavanaugh, the ship's communication officer, said,「Now what do you think of that?」I called briefly upon God. Aboard the LCIL, D Day hadn't seemed like that to us. There is nothing like a broadcasting studio in London to give a chap perspective.

— A. J. Liebling,「Cross-Channel Trip」

Although I have used the testimony of Elyot's letters and writings to document his encounter with the resurgent Scripturalism of the 1530s and 1540s, the context in which he worked was clearly energized by cultural and historical currents that encompassed considerably more than the issues of doctrine, religious practices, and ecclesiastical sovereignty dividing Protestants from Catholics, exacerbated as these issues were. Elyot himself identified the challenges which he faced and met with his literary enterprise as questions about his commitment to the king's and Cromwell's reforming measures or to the「savor」of「holy scripture.」Yet the successful popularizing and secularizing measures which Elyot took in jointly pursuing his course as a vernacular writer and bypassing religious issues are, I think, to be construed as evidence running with rather than against the momentum of a larger ideological movement — in the first place because popularizing and secularizing were real options for Elyot, and in the second place because he was able to make them work. Given our present state of knowledge, even as advanced by Elizabeth Eisenstein's study of the printing press as an agent of cultural change, we are constrained to deal symptomatically and speculatively for the most part with the complex of energizing developments — in which printing, humanism, and the Reformation figured prominently with social and economic changes — that ushered in the modern era of the book.

— Janel Mueller, The Native Tongue and the Word: Developments in English Prose Style, 1380–1580

The passage from A. J. Liebling follows his account of the Allied invasion of Normandy on 6 June 1944 as he experienced it from an infantry landing craft. The style is recognizably classic. Its model is conversation, its occasion is informal, its tone is relaxed, confident, and unhedged, and it takes the pose that it is presentational rather than argumentative. It actually makes many strong assertions, concerning what D-Day was really like, the nature of institutional reporting, and the reliability of interchangeable mouthpieces who speak from something other than local knowledge and according to the agenda of their institutions. But these assertions are disguised as mere presentations of what would have been evident to anyone present on the little craft.

The passage supplies the accidental information that a reader cannot be expected to have: what「large」means in measuring an infantry landing craft, the number of the crew, the way Liebling was accommodated on board. But there is no gratuitous display of arcane military knowledge unnecessary to the narrative. Nothing is merely the product of the observer; nothing depends on being able to share the writer's personal construal of the evidence; everything depends on being able to share the writer's position.

The anecdote is a reporter's reflection on reporting and rests on a contrast between a description without authority and an experience that Liebling can stand behind. Just as the real artillery salvo drowns out the recording of one on the radio, so Liebling's experience, which he shares with the officers on board the landing craft, drowns out the account of the Normandy invasion as related from a radio studio in London. The force of the anecdote depends upon the position of the writer; the details are marshaled to put the reader in the same position, so he can see for himself what the writer relates.

As befits conversation, the sentences follow one another in a sequence that seems natural and inevitable, but this is a very efficient narrative. On reflection, it is a miniature masterpiece of construction. The complete narrative is a figural argument for Liebling's view of news reporting as set against the B.B.C's. It contains within it, perfectly positioned, a miniature version of the same figural argument — the drowning out of the B.B.C's canned account by the real thing. The global figure of the passage and the local figure of the salvos mirror each other like macrocosm and microcosm. Both figures work by giving the reader a highly imagistic narrative from which he will certainly draw the obvious point. Yet the entire passage sounds spontaneous and conversational. The writer has done all the work invisibly, and the prose does not draw attention to itself or to the writer's work.

Classic style used in this way is not in the least restricted to eyewitness reporting. The passage from Dodd we treated in「The Reader is Competent」works in just this way. It includes a wealth of facts and scholarly machinery, but it presents them as accidental information that merely needs to be supplied to the reader in a sufficiently clear fashion: the reader will then make, with Dodd, the inevitable observations. Dodd's passage, like Liebling's, sounds conversational, confident, unhedged. This appearance of confidence comes largely from the way the writer introduces facts and citations with perfect clarity: neither the facts nor their relations to each other are fuzzy. The way the components stand together is fully formed: the writer knows exactly the relationships he means to present.

Janel Mueller's passage on Sir Thomas Elyot appears in her book on late medieval and renaissance English prose style. The passage is unclassic, not principally for local reasons — the side issues that bury in obscurity the figure structuring the passage, for example — but in its conception of scene, cast, and subject. It is a summary of evidence, but assertive and defensive rather than disinterested. The writer presses for agreement while defending from objection and attack, as if the scene and cast were adversarial, not conversational. If the writer obscures what she has to say as she goes along, it serves a strategic purpose: in the end there will be no clear interpretation to which the reader might respond. This style is best suited to juridical scenes and casts, where winning is everything; it is normally incompatible with the obligations of scholarship. The confusion of scene in Mueller induces an obvious strain, resulting in a conflicted form in which bits of scholarly evidence, vague in themselves, are imprecisely connected to each other, and sometimes not connected at all:「Given our present state of knowledge, even as advanced by Elizabeth Eisenstein's study of the printing press as an agent of cultural change . . .」Scholarly asides are scattered at random, offering the decor of erudition without the justification of scholarly argument.

Liebling, who writes about what you can see and hear, and Dodd, who writes about the most abstract concerns of textual editing and historical interpretation, both write as if the subject they are presenting has a clear existence independent of the writer or the writing. Mueller, on the other hand, writes as if her subjects depend upon the writer for their very existence: Elyot's encounter with「the resurgent Scripturalism of the 1530s and 1540s,」「the context in which he worked,」the nature of the「cultural and historical currents」that「energized」that context. That may be why the word「clearly」in the phrase「the context in which he worked was clearly energized by cultural and historical currents that encompassed considerably more than the issues of doctrine, religious practices, and ecclesiastical sovereignty dividing Protestants from Catholics, exacerbated as these issues were」rings false. Clearly? To whom? Could it be clear to just anyone who reads Elyot's「letters and writings」? Could it be clear to Elyot himself? Apparently not. For the author appears to be disagreeing with Elyot's claims. What he did should be construed, she says, in a certain way, namely「as evidence running with rather than against the momentum of a larger ideological movement.」And it should be construed this way, she claims, tautologically, because it is precisely what he did. The「evidence」she offers is「presented」as dependent upon her「point of view,」and the particular view of the evidence that gives it force is not described in a way that would allow the reader to adopt the writer's perspective. Only the conclusions from that perspective are offered, in a manner so obscure as to place them beyond challenge.

Even though there is an ostensible presentation of evidence in the passage on Elyot, the evidence depends entirely upon the writer's disposition. A skillful practitioner in this style can deflect questions about the validity of such evidence, but in this case, there is a marked strain in trying to establish with precision relationships among abstractions that are themselves shapeless and indefinite. In consequence, the whole passage betrays an understandable anxiety that even the writer might lose sight of her own subject. She must reassure herself that what she is talking about is real, that it matters, that her understanding of it is both defensible and significant, and that the reader is interested. It is not surprising that her anxiety is communicated to the reader.

In mathematics, whose normal subject is precise relationships between abstractions, such problems are rare. The objects, while they are abstract, are as definite as infantry-landing boats, and the evidence for the relationships is precise and publicly accessible in a way that the direction of「the momentum of a larger ideological movement」never can be. The borders of such an ideological movement are not public and definite the way the borders of an isosceles triangle — or the dimensions of the wardroom on an infantry landing craft — are. The strain evident in the passage on Sir Thomas Elyot's career as a vernacular writer is the strain of attempting to talk about imperfectly formed conceptions of invented relationships between indefinite abstractions as if they had the precision and public accessibility of square roots or the complement of officers on a Landing Craft, Infantry, Large. Dodd, because he has thought through thoroughly and precisely the relationships and abstractions he wishes to present, can do so as if he were Liebling writing about one boat bobbing in the lee of another. Classic style is perfectly suited to presenting abstractions, but the classic writer, having thought out the features and borders of abstractions, presents them confidently, without recourse to hedges, contortions, and obscurities that undercut a reader's ability to judge the writer's conclusions for himself.

La grande nouveauté technique de l'artillerie a mis quelque temps à faire sentir toutes ses conséquences. La dotation de l'armée de Charles VIII a suffi à lui ouvrir Milan, Florence, Rome et Naples. Cette «invention diabolique», que devaient stigmatiser l'Arioste et Rabelais après lui, condamnait les méthodes traditionnelles, les parades et les offensives de belles armures. Elle rendait, à long terme, inutile la classe aristocratique dont la guerre était la raison d'être, à moins d'une adaptation qu'il lui fallut cruellement accomplir pendant quarante ans de batailles en Italie et ailleurs. Surtout, l'artillerie va amener une révision complète de la fortification et des systèmes défensifs. Les plus grands architectesingénieurs, Francesco di Giorgio, Giuliano da Sangallo, étudient les plans à redents et des bastions articulés qui modifient la physionomie des murailles et par là assez directement celle des villes. Les études les plus saisissantes seront celles de Michel-Ange pour la défense de Florence en 1529–1530. C'est comme ingénieur que César Borgia eut un moment Léonard à son service. On n'a pas encore complètement mesuré toutes les conséquences de l'évolution de l'art de la guerre à la Renaissance.

[The great novelty of Renaissance warfare, the use of artillery, took some time to make its full effect. Thanks to it Charles VIII had Milan, Florence, Rome and Naples at his mercy. This「diabolical invention」as Ariosto called it (and Rabelais was to denounce it after him) put an end to the traditional mode of warfare, to the dashing charges of knights in armor. And in the end it rendered useless the aristocratic class whose raison d'être was warfare — until it had undergone the re-education provided by four gruelling decades of fighting in Italy and elsewhere. The increased use of artillery led to drastic modifications of the fortifications and defensive outworks of towns, and the greatest experts in this field, Francesco di Giorgio and Giuliano da Sangallo, invented a system of indented traces and articulated bastions which radically changed the aspect of the walls and even the layout of fortified cities. The most remarkable plans were those which Michelangelo made for the defense of Florence (1529–1530), and it was in the capacity of engineer that Cesare Borgia called in Leonardo. The extent to which the evolution of the art of war affected the Renaissance has yet to be fully assessed.]

— André Chastel, Le Mythe de la Renaissance 1420–1520

This passage on the introduction of artillery in sixteenth-century warfare and its effect both on large abstractions such as「the traditional mode of warfare」and on tangible things such as walls and fortifications, in addition to its social consequences — things that in other hands might become「the direction of cultural and social trends energized by the complex of military developments」 — is organized by one short point at the beginning and a complementary one at the end. Everything between them is a careful expansion of the first point, at once supporting it with illustrations and examples and preparing the way for the concluding point. Although this passage of just two hundred words contains references to eight people and four cities, as well as allusions to actual fortifications, to plans for new defenses, and to four decades of fighting in two places (one specified, the other not), in addition to the citation of one epithet and an aside on its later repetition, each of these elements occupies a well-conceived place in the discussion. None of them seems awkward or arbitrary. The erudition does not seem gratuitous or strained; it does not obscure the figure that organizes the passage or obstruct its easy flow. The complexity and obscurity of the subject are not offered as a tacit justification for a complex and obscure presentation.

Palabra por palabra, la versión de Galland es la peor escrita de todas, la más embustera y más débil, pero fue la mejor leída. Quienes intimaron con ella, conocieron la felicidad y el asombro. Su orientalismo, que ahora nos parece frugal, encandiló a cuantos aspiraban rapé y complotaban una tragedia en cinco actos. Doce primorosos volúmenes aparecieron de 1707 a 1717, doce volúmenes innumerablemente leídos y que pasaron a diversos idiomas, incluso el hindustani y elárabe. Nosotros, meros lectores anacrónicos del siglo veinte, percibimos en ellos el sabor dulzarrón del siglo dieciocho y no el desvanecido aroma oriental, que hace doscientos años determinó su innovación y su gloria. Nadie tiene la culpa del desencuentro y menos que nadie, Galland.

[Word for word, Galland's version is the worst written, the most fraudulent and the weakest, but it was the most widely read. Readers who grew intimate with it experienced happiness and amazement. Its orientalism, which we now find tame, dazzled the sort of person who inhaled snuff and plotted tragedies in five acts. Twelve exquisite volumes appeared from 1707 to 1717, twelve volumes innumerably read, which passed into many languages, including Hindustani and Arabic. We, mere anachronistic readers of the twentieth century, perceive in these volumes the cloyingly sweet taste of the eighteenth century and not the evanescent oriental aroma that two hundred years ago was their innovation and their glory. No one is to blame for this missed encounter, least of all Galland.]

— Jorge Luis Borges,「Los traductores de las 1001 noches」

The story of the story of the thousand and one nights is perhaps untellable. The cultural provenance of the tales — indian, Persian, and Arabic — is perhaps irrecoverable. The manuscript traditions of the originals are a nightmare that makes the legendary textual problems of Marlowe's Doctor Faustus look trivial. The constitution of the work — which tales belong to it, or at least which tales belong to which versions of it, and in what order — is fundamentally unsettled. It was disseminated through Europe in the eighteenth century through a series of famous translations whose history is at best complex and subtle, at worst unknown.

These impediments to knowledge might paralyze any writer who allowed his style to be influenced by doubts about his capacity to perform. Additional impediments could plausibly be found in the cultural and personal situation of the writer. Jorge Luis Borges was an elite twentieth-century Latin American classic writer, a librarian, a famous erudite, and male. The Thousand and One Nights, by contrast, comes from traditions that are not elite, not privileged, not scholarly, not twentieth-century, not white, not European or Latin American, and not male: the transmission and perhaps creation of the tales were largely in the hands of women. They were subversive tales recognized as such in their own time, intentionally politically incorrect not just for our age but for their own: they present an onslaught against the very notion of ideological engineering as an effective response to the complexity of human affairs. These tales were introduced to Europeans by English and French men of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries.

Borges, confronted with this sea of difficulty and separated culturally and personally from the origins of the tales and their translators, nonetheless adopts the classic pose. He presents truth that is generally available. In principle, it could be confirmed by anybody, regardless of cultural identity. He conceives of and presents his subject as existing independently of the writer. He presents it to a competent audience in prose that itself is never allowed to become a subject of the writing. There is a symmetry between writer and reader: like Dodd in considering the textual history of the Fourth Gospel, Borges assumes that in principle anybody could learn what he has learned, and would then see just what he sees. Although Borges is dealing with large abstractions — orientalism, quality in writing, the reception of a text, happiness, the flavor of the eighteenth century, innovation and glory, blame, and extraordinarily complex cultural patterns — he conceives of them as clear and exact. They are as highly defined and visible as cut crystal. None of them depends upon the writer for its existence.

Anything can be presented in classic style, including the cultural and historical situation of the writer and reader, when these are part of the intended subject. Borges presents our situation as twentieth-century readers as part of presenting the truth of these translations and their history. But such matters never displace the chosen subject and never interfere with the performance. Although a classic writer could take as his subject ways in which cultural, historical, and personal situation might make writing impossible, or at least hard, his actual writing would never betray any evidence of the difficulty of which he speaks. He would present clearly, simply, intelligibly, and assuredly the truth that it is impossible to write clearly, simply, intelligibly, and assuredly. He would take the pose that the reader will share his recognition of the truth that it is impossible for the reader to share his recognition of anything.

The Touraine is the heartland of France. It was here, as much as in any other single locality, that the subtle, clear, precise language of modern France developed, and here also, fittingly, that the subtle, fine, expert cooking of modern France developed.

— Waverley Root, The Food of France

Man kann etwas finden, ohne es gesucht zu haben, ja jeder Kunstforscher weiß aus Erfahrung, daß man fast stets etwas anderes findet, als was man sucht. Wer Erdbeeren sucht, weiß, wie eine Erdbeere aussieht, wer aber den Zusammenhang sucht, weiß nicht, wie dieser Zusammenhang aussieht. Die allgemeine Gefahr besteht nun darin, daß Wunsch und Wille, etwas zu finden, vorzeitig im Geiste des Suchenden ein Bild des Zusammenhangs und zwar ein falsches hervorbringen. [One can find something without having sought it — indeed, every connoisseur knows from experience that one nearly always finds something other than what one seeks. When you go looking for strawberries, you know what a strawberry looks like — but when you go looking for interrelationships, you do not know what they will look like. The ever-present danger is precisely that the desire and the will to find something may, in the mind of the seeker, precociously project a connection — one that does not exist.]

— Max J. Friedländer, Die Altniederländische Malerei

The imperfect structural correspondence of painting to literature does not in fact preclude or even severely limit the comparison of the arts. What it does is permit an ever changing set of correlations by painters and writers, who are free to stress different elements of the structures of their art in order to achieve this correspondence. An interartistic parallel thus is not dictated by the preexistent structures of the arts involved; instead, it is an exploration of how these two structures can be aligned. This alignment is part of the overall essential homonymity and synonymity of semiosis by which sign systems and their texts approximate one another and then diverge.

— Wendy Steiner, The Colors of Rhetoric: Problems in the

Relation between Modern Literature and Painting

The passages by Root and Friedländer are classic; the passage by Steiner is not. The difference has nothing to do with the nature of the subjects they treat, but with how those subjects are conceived. Root and Friedländer treat their subjects with a clarity and exactness that makes them appear to be entirely independent of the writers. Steiner treats her subject in a way that makes it dependent upon her for its existence as well as for its expression.

Root treats food and language while Friedländer treats「interrelationships」: food is available to the senses,「interrelationships」to abstract thought, and language to both, demonstrating that classic style is not determined by the nature of its subject. Root says something absurd while Friedländer says something we can all confirm, demonstrating that classic style is not determined by whether what it says is actually true.

What Root says is assured, relaxed, conversational, and classic. It is no less classic for being wrong. The supposed aboriginal「purity」of French in the Touraine is an enduring fairy tale that withstands all contradiction — the shop sign in Tours, for example, that announces「Le Fast-Foud」 — and any claim that modern French cuisine has its roots in the Touraine will provoke outrage from approximately Sens to the southern limit of the Lyonnais. The claim of a relationship between the qualities of a cuisine and the qualities of a language — and, of course, the linguistic qualities Root refers to are qualities of a style, not of a language — must be regarded as doubtful. Many great chefs whose dishes are subtle, clear, and precise speak in a style far removed from that of Pascal and Madame de Sévigné. But Root is not seriously making claims about a relationship between cuisine and language. He is rather offering the disguised assertion that cuisine — as well as literary style — is an important mark of a culture.

Language and cuisine, even if both are limited to their modern French varieties, are large and indefinite domains here confidently subsumed under a deeply entrenched ontological metaphor and so treated as「things」more or less on the order of Friedländer's strawberries. Friedländer, the third director of the great Kaiser Friedrich Museum in Berlin, liked to start with evidence of a primary sort — actual pictures — and subsumed his abstractions to this model, treating them as「things」so clear and exact that it is almost impossible to remember that they are abstractions. He noticed, with characteristic mordancy, that a theorist whose abstractions could not clearly and in detail be separated from his discourse produced students who, like their teacher, invariably saw only what they expected to see, whereas connoisseurs like himself whose abstractions were conceptually independent of their discourse regularly encountered pictures that contradicted all their expectations about the painting of particular times and places.

Steiner's procedure is just the sort of thing that raised his skeptical doubts. Her passage, as it reaches its crescendo, is more and more speculative and impossible to verify by looking at what Friedländer would have regarded as common evidence, particular literary texts and paintings. The classic writer, no matter how abstract his subject, will present it as so sharply defined in itself and so independent of the writer as to count for all of us as a「thing,」with the implication that any one of us will see the evidence for it if only we are placed in the appropriate position. Steiner's passage, by contrast, is fundamentally unclassic because it rejects any responsibility on the writer's part to present its subject as a「thing」independent of the writer. On the contrary, the amorphousness of her subject, its dependence upon her for its existence, and the lack of a symmetry between what she and her reader might be able to see as evidence are valued in her writing as marks of the writer's brilliance instead of the writer's incompetence. The final dance of abstractions between「sign systems and their texts」and「the overall essential homonymity and synonymity of semiosis」that contains the「structures」of literature and painting has lost contact so completely with anything available to classic style as to suggest that Steiner's gifts are at least partly oracular. Root is vulnerable exactly because he has presented something so precise and open to our own verification that anyone who has the good fortune to learn both French and French cuisine can challenge him. Steiner, wrapping her speculations in a rhetorical mantle whose most conspicuous colors are those of jargon, suggests she knows things that the rest of us do not, and so avoids root's vulnerability, but at the risk of claiming for herself a kind of supernatural sight and insight. She suggests she has entered into deep mysteries unavailable to the sort of person who might observe that while painting and literature are not in all respects similar, they can be compared, and that a general inquiry into the subject will yield the not surprising result that painting and literature are similar in some ways and different in others.