Fundamentals: Write Second

If you have completed the common exercises in speech, you are probably ready to do them in writing. If you are wondering why there has been such a lengthy oral preliminary to the acquisition of a style of writing, our answer can be found in the opening paragraphs of this book. Writing is an intellectual activity. To achieve good prose styles, writers must work through intellectual issues, not merely acquire mechanical techniques. The heart of classic style is the root scene of classic joint attention. The actual scene of writing is blended with the classic scene so that writing is treated as speech. No matter how many people are addressed, no matter how indeterminate this「audience」is, no matter where they are, the style treats them as if they were a single person to whom the writer is speaking. Inferences, judgments, predictions, and cultural knowledge are treated as「things」that can be directly perceived. Neither the concept of classic joint attention nor an ability to blend an actual scene with the classic scene can be acquired simply by writing and then doing some local revision. Blending complex networks to the classic scene defines classic style, and while it is possible to acquire this ability through imitation of classic models, it is a chancy and inefficient path. In the Studio, we are offering a tested and secure path. If you work out the intellectual issues first, the activity of writing will be defined by a concept of style. You can then proceed with confidence.

You have already practiced the common exercises in speech. Now is the moment to observe that what works in speech cannot be directly transfered to writing. Go through the common exercises anew, this time in writing. We are not asking you to transcribe what you have already said, offering it in written form. Approach the exercises now with the resources of writing; do not cling to the resources of speech. Anchoring writing in speech is not pretending that writing is speech. Anchoring a mental network supporting expression in the classic scene is not pretending that you are in an actual classic scene; it is more subtle. It may sound paradoxical to say both that having done the speech exercises will help you to master a style of writing and that writing is a very different activity from speech because it lacks the resources of speech. But both are true and for a crucial reason: classic prose style blends speech with writing. A classic prose stylist must be able to supply by imaginative blending the structure of classic joint attention that the actual environment of writing lacks.

In what follows, we will add some comments on doing these common exercises in writing.

TUTORIAL: Blending Scenes

Writing is not a scene of classic joint attention, but in classic style the writer will use the classic scene as an anchor so that, in the blend, writing becomes speaking, the indefinite audience that is not present becomes a single person who is right there, and the subject becomes something that can be perceived. If writing is not a scene of classic joint attention, neither is reading — and writing, especially in classic style, assumes a reader, so it is part of the writer's task to induce the reader to anchor her activity in the classic scene as well.

Neither writer nor reader is deluded. They both know they do not share an environment they can refer to directly, but the writer anchors the actual scene to the classic scene in order to provide a consistent style.

TUTORIAL: Lost in Words

In writing, you lose the effects of the charm you may have in person. You lose the effects of gesture, proximity, warmth, intonation. In person, you can command and hold attention by being attractive, but all of that is gone in writing. All you have is the appeal of the presentation — the attraction of thought and of language. A speaker of some personal charm can give a pastiche of clichés the illusion of meaning, but in writing, a pastiche of clichés will always look like a pastiche of clichés. Presence is crucial to the classic scene. But in classic writing, there is no speaker, no shared environment, no interaction between speaker and listener. Presence must be supplied by the writing itself. Bernard Shaw, a dramatist who wrote his plays to be read, was especially sensitive to this distinction. He once remarked that there are fifty ways of saying the word「yes,」and five hundred ways of saying the word「no,」but just one way of writing them down.

TUTORIAL: Onset and Dismount

A written text has a beginning and an end — a first sentence and a last. Sections of writing have beginnings and ends too. Typically, speaking is not so discrete. When you drop into classic style in speaking, there may have been quite a bit of speech before it — greetings, small talk, and obligatory ceremonial questions and answers — and always after it the dribbling little bits of farewell, which the Viennese used to call「Goodbye without leaving.」Your first words are unlikely to be taken as the start of a coherent presentation. In classic prose, it is automatic. The first sentence is the onset. The last sentence, at least of the section, is the dismount. Crisp onset and dismount carry a premium in classic writing beyond their value in classic speech.

Advanced Writing

Every classic stylist encounters novel situations. We explained in the Essay how some occasions call for a sequence of styles, or a blend of styles, or the development of a special style based on a general style. A style, after all, is defined by a coherent and consistent stand on the elements of style, expressed as a short series of questions about truth, presentation, writer, reader, thought, language, and their relationships. These questions are addressed to fundamental issues that must be answered deliberately or by default before we can write at all. Style is an intellectual matter of thinking through these questions in any situation. Someone who has worked through the curriculum of the Studio is equipped to recognize and work on new projects without further coaching by thinking through the elements of style and drawing on techniques learned in the Studio. In what follows, we suggest a few encounters with novelty.

EXERCISE 13: Sketchbook

Most of the writing instruction in the United States focuses on revision. This approach is fatal for the student attempting to master classic style. The essential ability of the classic stylist is to inhabit the style and to work within it. It is almost always a mistake to try to drag a piece of writing that was unclassic at its inception over rocks and through vegetation in a misconceived attempt to move it somehow to classic heights. Inhabiting the style means imaginatively blending the classic scene with the mental network supporting expression. The blend anchors the network and provides the stylistic structure. It is the platform from which the classic stylist works from beginning to end. The classic stylist learns to speak directly from inside that blend, even if the initial performances are weak. A piece conceived and written from within classic style can be improved, but no draft written without a settled style can be revised into classic style. The conventional advice to think of「style」as a final touch leads to disaster because style is not a surface decoration that can be added during revision. Style must be considered at the outset. Forget entirely the idea that「working on your writing」begins after you have something down on paper.

Consider that students in an art studio are often asked to take their sketchbook out into the field to do speed sketching. They see something and sketch it rapidly, never erasing but instead flipping quickly to a blank page to sketch something else. Later, they review their sketches, but they do not revise. In this Studio, the sketchbook exercise asks you to do in writing what the art student does in speed sketching. Here is the exercise: Recognize something in the field; step into classic style; present your recognition. Do not revise. Continue until you have ten prose sketches. As you begin to advance in your sketchbook exercises, you might move up, as you did in the common exercises, to subjects that are less and less directly perceptible, always blending them stylistically with what is directly perceptible. Once you have finished your ten speed sketches in classic style, put the work of your session aside. Review it later, but do not revise it. Tomorrow, do the sketchbook exercise again. A daily dose of the sketchbook exercise for a couple of weeks seems to have the power to move students rapidly. At first, they find this extremely difficult and seem to make no progress, but after a few days the style starts to come naturally. Some students get past their previous conditioning only after a couple of weeks of the sketchbook exercise has purged them of bad habits.

EXERCISE 14: Coherent Mixed Styles

It may seem paradoxical in a Studio devoted to classic style to include the study of styles that are only partially classic. But classic virtues can come from even a few classic ingredients, and the opportunity to deploy such mixed styles arises frequently. Instruction manuals have a practical motive, but they do not have to be impersonal; the cast can be collusive; the thought and language can be distinctive. The voice does not have to be one job description speaking to another. We can instead match a practical motive with a classic presentation, to produce a mixed style that might be called classic practical style, a style whose attraction and power do not depend exclusively on accomplishing a practical goal. Imagine reading a cookbook even if you have no intention of cooking. A cookbook in classic practical style might be attractive purely for the virtues of its classic presentation. There are many styles that can be mixed with classic ingredients to create an unmistakably classic flavor.

Here is the exercise: Pick a subject you understand well and write a「how-to」piece. The subject can be anything: how to identify a tree from its leaves, how to avoid probate, how to give a dinner party. The piece will be practical, of course, but experiment with the inclusion of classic ingredients. These classic ingredients might include a classic voice, a collusive cast, a full command of language, a crisp onset and dismount, truth as a complementary motive, presentation as a complementary purpose.

EXERCISE 15: Lists

Can a list be written in classic style? Of course. The material does not determine the style. The writer of a list could accept the stand of slavish adherence to a template, like a notary providing an inventory. But the writer can take the classic stand — someone recognizes something worth presenting to someone else. The writer can assume full responsibility for the selection.

A menu is a list, but if it is written in classic style, it can present the character and tradition of a restaurant and the nature of a cuisine. There is an owner, chef, or dining room manager standing behind the presentation. In classic style, neither the menu nor the wine list is a helter-skelter list of what happens to be available to eat and drink. A wine list can present the knowledge, culture, and taste of the sommelier. In the previous exercise, you practiced writing something in classic style that had an additional practical purpose. Menus and wine lists can similarly be written in classic style even though their ostensible purpose is practical. For someone interested in food and wine, a classic menu or wine list can be read for pleasure, even if the restaurant is a continent away or has been closed for years.

Menus and wine lists are only one example of lists that can take the classic stand and can accordingly be read and enjoyed independent of any practical goal. Georges Perec, in La vie mode d'emploi (Life A User's Manual), presents lists of the contents of basement storage lockers of an imaginary apartment building. Each is a masterful presentation in an individual voice not just of the items but also of the owner's habits, history, and character, and their cultural resonance. Here are two:

Bartlebooth's cellar:

In Bartlebooth's cellar there is some left-over coal on top of which still lies a black enamelled metal scuttle with a wooden grip fitted on its wire handle, a bicycle hanging on a butcher's hook, now unoccupied bottle racks, and his four travelling chests, four curved chests covered in tarred canvas, braced with wooden slats, with brass corners and hasps, and lined throughout with a sheet of zinc to ensure waterproofing.

The Rorschachs' cellar:

A bottle rack, wire, plastic-coated, is placed to the left of the slatted door. The lower level of the rack holds five bottles of fruit brandies: kirsch, apricot, quetsch, plum, raspberry. On one of the middle rows there is the score — in Russian — of Rimsky-Korsakov's version of Pushkin's Golden Cockerel, and a probably popular novel entitled Spice, or the Revenge of the Louvain Locksmith, with a cover depicting a girl handing a bag of gold to a judge. On the top row, a lidless octagonal tin containing a few novelty chessmen made of plastic, crudely imitating Chinese ivory pieces: the knight is a kind of Dragon, the king a seated Buddha.

Ernest Hemingway is said to have written a six-word short story — 「For sale. Baby shoes. Never worn.」 — that provides the inspiration for this exercise. Here is the exercise: Locate some suitable publication that carries classified advertisements, and write for that publication a list offering items for sale. Take the classic stand.

EXERCISE 16: Résumé

A résumé is a list presenting a person. Its writer can take the classic stand. Often, résumés are completely unclassic, signaling — through their formatting and phrasing — anxiety and desire. Résumés often appear simultaneously pushy and defensive, with ungenerous margins, scarce white space, compressed fonts, hyperbolic and aggressive vocabulary (「High-powered self-starter seeks management position with superpotential for advancement」), and the listing of every conceivable fact that might sway a reader (「Second-place, all-class essay competition, 7th grade, East Nowhere Middle School」). Academic résumés often expose self-inflicted wounds under「Publications」(「Genetics of the ALDH2 locus. Science, submitted」). Anyone established in the academy knows that anybody can submit anything anywhere; a submission is not a publication. A classic résumé, by contrast, is one whose writer, stylistically, is self-possessed, unconcerned, merely presenting. Stylistically, the writer has no anxiety. The writer does not want anything from the reader. The motive is truth — not desire for a job — and there is symmetry between writer and reader. A classic résumé typically has pleasing margins, ample white space, and a classic font. Its phrasing is calm. It is often distinctive for the range of lower-level detritus it leaves out. The style is not affected at all by insecurity, fear of unemployment, or sense of urgency, regardless of what is in the writer's mental network.

Here is the exercise: Write a résumé strongly influenced by classic style for a historical person: Anne Boleyn before her marriage, Einstein when he worked in the Swiss patent office, Hannibal before he invaded Europe, Grace Kelly before she made her first movie, Vermeer applying to the painters' guild.

EXERCISE 17: Admissions Essay

The essay, or statement, that an applicant submits for admission to a program belongs to a real scene that, like the résumé and the job interview, is unclassic in cast and purpose. But the applicant can write the essay entirely in classic style and may by doing so distinguish the application from a mountain of predictable rival submissions. Here is the exercise: Imagine such a case and write an admissions essay in which you, someone you know, or a historical or fictional person is the candidate.

EXERCISE 18: Science

Classic style is often the ideal style for scientific writing. Here is the exercise: Write a scientific piece in classic style. Point out where your reader should look and present the recognition. Stylistically, your reader is with you in a scene of classic joint attention, and pleased to be there.

Accomplished scientists often eschew stridency of any sort, since after all it is presumably the science that is the subject rather than the scientist or the scientist's chapel. Treating scientific writing as adversarial argument disguises the fact that almost all of a mature scientific piece is presentational: it presents the relevant tradition of research, and it presents the facts, events, and evidence that the reader needs.

Your own writing for this exercise will not resemble Sir Isaac Newton's prose, because he wrote in the early eighteenth century, but it may come as a surprise to see how often Newton used a style close to classic. Here is a passage from the Opticks (1704):

In a very dark Chamber, at a round Hole, about one third Part of an Inch broad made in the Shut of a Window, I placed a Glass Prism, whereby the Beam of the Sun's Light, which came in at that Hole, might be refracted upwards toward the opposite Wall of the Chamber, and there form a colour'd Image of the Sun. The Axis of the Prism (that is the Line passing through the middle of the Prism from one end of it to the other end parallel to the edge of the Refracting Angle was in this and the following Experiments perpendicular to the incident Rys. About this Axis I turned the Prism slowly, and saw the refracted Light on the Wall, or coloured Image of the Sun, first to descend, and then to ascend. Between the Descent and Ascent, when the Image seemed Stationary, I stopp'd the Prism, and fix'd it in that Posture, that it should be moved no more. For in that posture the Refractions of the Light at the two Sides of the Refracting Angle, that is at the Entrance of the Rays into the Prism, and at their going out of it, were equal to one another.

EXERCISE 19: Obituaries

obituaries often follow a template closely and exclude classic presentation. Such obituaries are conventional descriptions of mainly surface information — date and place of birth, education, professional accomplishment, cause of death. In these routine performances, there is often no indication that the writer is responsible for selecting details or exercising independent judgment. There are, however, exceptions. Jeremy Pearce's obituary for John L. Bull, one of the authors of The Audubon Society Field Guide to North American Birds, Eastern Region, from which we quote in the first entry of the Museum, appeared in The New York Times for 15 August 2006. He includes the obligatory descriptive information but takes the classic stance in presenting what he has judged to be worth presenting. Here is how he ends the obituary:

Mr. Bull was often accompanied by his wife, an educator at the [American Museum of Natural History], on birding journeys. In 1989, the couple collaborated on a book,「Birds of North America: Western Region: A Quick Identification Guide for All Bird-Watchers.」

Remarking on the mourning doves that he spotted in Central Park, Mr. Bull observed:「They are the most monogamous birds I've ever watched. They always travel in pairs.」

This is classic presentation; it follows no template. The writer, in offering an analogy between the travels of Mr. Bull and his wife, and the travels of the mourning doves that Mr. Bull observed, decides what is significant and appropriate. His perfect dismount is a classic achievement, one that belongs to a writer, not to a template. Now try writing a classic obituary of your own.

EXERCISE 20: Real Estate Pitch

Like obituaries, real estate prose of the sort one finds in multiple listings of properties for sale is typically entirely impersonal. It is marked by obligatory hyperbole and artificial effervescence. Here is the exercise: Study some real estate prose and then present a house as if it were for sale, offering in classic style what the reader would want to know if that reader were shopping for a house. You might want to present a property not actually for sale: the Ca' d'Oro in Venice, Jacques Cœur's hôtel particulier in Bourges, the Rockoxhuis in Antwerp, the Getty Villa in Malibu, the White House during the federal government's bankruptcy sale.

EXERCISE 21: Restaurant Review

In classic style, direct perceptions, inferences, and judgments can all be treated as recognitions and can all be presented to a companion who will share these recognitions once they are pointed out. Restaurant reviews are not merely replete with inferences and judgments; they are an outstanding example in contemporary writing of discussions of taste, subject to endless debate and qualification. In classic style, taste can be treated as if it were as perceptible as a table setting. A restaurant review in the hands of a classic stylist treats its standards of judgment as obviously appropriate and writes as if the reader would agree not merely with the evaluation of the flavors in the ris de veau en salade but with the standards that produce that evaluation. The style is indifferent to what those standards might be. They might devalue mere novelty or they might value novelty above all. A classic restaurant review could either criticize a formal restaurant for using exotic instead of common ingredients in a traditional dish or praise it for innovating the traditional dish by using exotic ingredients. The classic restaurant review consists, in large measure, of placing the reader in a position to perceive both the validity of the judgments and the appropriateness of the standards — as if such matters are impossible to miss once obstacles are cleared out of the way and the reader has an unobstructed view of things.

Consider:

On a November evening in Dijon, Jean-Pierre Billoux serves wild duck, in its own juice, roasted with apples. This is the refinement of a classic by a master cook. There is no stridency or forced originality. The eight-year-old Corton Grancey seems to have been made for this perfectly roasted duck. This dish is the culmination of a tradition that has its historical roots in Guilaume Tirel's「Chapitre de Fricassure」; it reflects the accumulated wisdom of a six-hundred-year-old craft that translates nature and seasons, and their immemorial recurrence, into textures, fragrances, and flavors that allow you to feel yourself a part of them. It is rooted in a place too; it is not a cuisine suitable for「international hotels.」The seasons, the fragrances, the flavors of Burgundy are not the seasons, the fragrances, the flavors of Kyoto, or London, or Las Vegas.

The superiority of a cuisine rooted in a place and in a season over a cuisine suitable for「international hotels」is not asserted but treated as if it were as obvious as the duck and its apples.

Here is the exercise: Write a classic review of a restaurant and post it to one of the many online sites carrying restaurant reviews. Focus especially on including judgments in passing, almost incidentally, as if they are not personal judgments at all but rather elements of the restaurant that any competent diner could recognize, once pointed in the right direction.

EXERCISE 22: Travel Writing

Travel pieces — like cookbooks, restaurant reviews, and real estate descriptions — can be utilitarian. The reader is going somewhere and looks for facts and information in order to organize a trip. But in all of these genres, the practical purpose can be subordinated or even ignored. Travel writing can be completely presentational, and when it is, it can incorporate indefinite ranges of history, judgments, and cultural commentary, treated as if they can be seen.

The Michelin Green Guides are the gold standard of commercial travel writing. Here is a passage from the entry on the Abbey of Fontenay from the Michelin Green Guide to Burgundy:

Cistercian architecture first appeared in Burgundy in the first half of the 12C (Cistercium was the Latin name for the town of Cîteaux). It is characterized by a spirit of simplicity in keeping with the teaching of St Bernard. He objected bitterly to the luxury displayed in some monastery churches, opposing the theories of some of the great builders of the 11C and 12C with extraordinary passion. His argument against the belief of abbots such as St Hugh, Peter the Venerable, and Suger, who believed that nothing could be too rich for the glory of God was expressed for example in the letter he wrote to William, Abbot of St-Thierry, in which he asks,「Why this excessive height in the churches, this enormous length, this unnecessary width, these sumptuous ornaments and curious paintings that draw the eyes and distract attention and meditation? . . . We the monks, who have forsaken ordinary life and renounce worldly wealth and ostentation for the love of Christ, . . . in whom do we hope to awaken devotion with these ornaments?」

Fontenay, which is now a historic site and has not been a functioning church since the French Revolution of 1789, is one of the finest surviving examples of the austere beauty characteristic of Cistercian architecture, but no current visitor to Fontenay encounters Saint Bernard, his mentality, the opposition between styles of spirituality, or the architectural expression of that opposition in the uncluttered severity of Fontenay contrasted to the rich iconography of its Burgundian rival to the south, Cluny.

On reflection, it is not a surprise that the recognitions presented by the classic travel writer might lie beyond perception. As Mark Twain, launched on his career by his travel writing, observed,「[L]ife does not consist mainly — or even largely — of facts and happenings. It consists mainly of the storm of thoughts that is forever blowing through one's head.」Classic style domesticates these vast conceptual networks by blending them with the classic scene. Travel writing is an exemplary genre for such capacious classic presentation.

Here is the exercise: Write a classic travel piece, a presentation of a place or places, ranging wherever thought takes you, and without foregrounding any practical purpose.

EXERCISE 23: Prejudices: What about Peanut Butter?

A prejudice is something that has been accepted without the benefit of considered judgment: a preference for Swiss chocolate or Chinese tea, let us say, when they have not actually been compared to any alternative: Belgian chocolate or Indian tea. Everyone has such prejudices, but they are rarely presented as such. If you loathe baroque architecture and find art nouveau architecture pleasing because you have paid close attention to the style you like and haven't paid any attention to any other style, your taste has been affected by prejudice, but that is not necessarily a bad thing — especially in classic style, because the style has a fundamental prejudice of its own for human scale, and life is too short to give an impartial and considered judgment to every variety of chocolate or every style of architecture.

Someone with a narrow taste guided by prejudice can in fact offer a thoroughly excellent presentation of what falls within this restricted taste. Someone whose taste for art nouveau architecture has become a prejudice might be just the person whose essay on Victor Horta you will find most informative and even well-judged. Paul Erdös, the subject of a biography called The Man Who Loved Only Numbers, referred to anyone who had stopped doing mathematics as「dead.」For him, nonmathematicians were not alive. This legendary and, for Erdös, personally debilitating prejudice against anything but numbers did not mean that he was not worth listening to when he was talking about mathematics.

A presentation that covers many alternatives is not necessarily as good as a presentation — even if driven by prejudice — that focuses on just one. Here is the exercise: Present something you know and love without being defensive about it at all, without worrying about being fair or balanced. Belgian beer, baroque music, surfing in Southern california. Ignore that voice that says,「What about German beer? Gregorian chant? Alaia surfing in Australia? What about peanut butter?」

EXERCISE 24: Tethered Excursions

For this advanced exercise, select and present in classic style a subject as far away from the blackbird in the tree as possible, something that requires thought branching over almost every kind of conceptual geography. Our example — just one — is the concept of privacy. Privacy is something that cannot be directly perceived at all. It is a concept that stretches over all of human history, with remarkable differences across cultures in the placement of the dividing line between the private and the public. It is a highly nuanced concept that has never settled down. On the contrary, every aspect of it, from legal to moral to psychological, seems to be contested in our own time and place. It involves indefinitely many people, including unknown people. Presenting the concept of privacy is maximally uncongenial to the scene of classic joint attention. If you can blend the conceptual network for thinking and talking about privacy with the classic scene, we think you can blend anything with the classic scene, and you can consider yourself a competent classic stylist.

Conclusion

Every great artist was once an apprentice who learned fundamentals from someone much less talented. Velásquez was a much greater painter than his teacher. Newton was a much greater mathematician than his teacher. Neither could have progressed without a formation in fundamentals. Now that you have obtained a formation in fundamentals and experimented with a few advanced exercises, you have completed the apprenticeship offered in this Studio. But artists never really leave their studios. They continue to refine their grasp of fundamentals and extend their reach. There is no end to this refinement or extension. If there were a final exercise in the Studio, it would be to keep your eyes open for new opportunities to advance your command of style while keeping your presentations clear and simple as the truth.