# 0101. Peering through the Eyepiece of Randomness

I remember, as a teenager, watching the yellow flame of the Sabbath candles dancing randomly above the white paraffin cylinders that fueled them. I was too young to think candlelight romantic, but still I found it magical — because of the flickering images created by the fire. They shifted and morphed, grew and waned, all without apparent cause or plan. Surely, I believed, there must be rhyme and reason underlying the flame, some pattern that scientists could predict and explain with their mathematical equations.「Life isn’t like that,」my father told me.「Sometimes things happen that cannot be foreseen.」He told me of the time when, in Buchenwald, the Nazi concentration camp in which he was imprisoned and starving, he stole a loaf of bread from the bakery. The baker had the Gestapo gather everyone who might have committed the crime and line the suspects up.「Who stole the bread?」the baker asked. When no one answered, he told the guards to shoot the suspects one by one until either they were all dead or someone confessed. My father stepped forward to spare the others. He did not try to paint himself in a heroic light but told me that he did it because he expected to be shot either way. Instead of having him killed, though, the baker gave my father a plum job, as his assistant.「A chance event,」my father said.「It had nothing to do with you, but had it happened differently, you would never have been born.」It struck me then that I have Hitler to thank for my existence, for the Germans had killed my father’s wife and two young children, erasing his prior life. And so were it not for the war, my father would never have emigrated to New York, never have met my mother, also a refugee, and never have produced me and my two brothers.

My father rarely spoke of the war. I didn’t realize it then, but years later it dawned on me that whenever he shared his ordeals, it was not so much because he wanted me to know of his experiences but rather because he wanted to impart a larger lesson about life. War is an extreme circumstance, but the role of chance in our lives is not predicated on extremes. The outline of our lives, like the candle’s flame, is continuously coaxed in new directions by a variety of random events that, along with our responses to them, determine our fate. As a result, life is both hard to predict and hard to interpret. Just as, looking at a Rorschach blot, you might see Madonna and I, a duck-billed platypus, the data we encounter in business, law, medicine, sports, the media, or your child’s third-grade report card can be read in many ways. Yet interpreting the role of chance in an event is not like intepreting a Rorschach blot; there are right ways and wrong ways to do it.

We often employ intuitive processes when we make assessments and choices in uncertain situations. Those processes no doubt carried an evolutionary advantage when we had to decide whether a saber-toothed tiger was smiling because it was fat and happy or because it was famished and saw us as its next meal. But the modern world has a different balance, and today those intuitive processes come with drawbacks. When we use our habitual ways of thinking to deal with today’s tigers, we can be led to decisions that are less than optimal or even incongruous. That conclusion comes as no surprise to those who study how the brain processes uncertainty: many studies point to a close connection between the parts of our brain that make assessments of chance situations and those that handle the human characteristic that is often considered our prime source of irrationality — our emotions. Functional magnetic resonance imaging, for example, shows that risk and reward are assessed by parts of the dopaminergic system, a brain-reward circuit important for motivational and emotional processes.1 The images show, too, that the amygdala, which is also linked to our emotional state, especially fear, is activated when we make decisions couched in uncertainty.2

The mechanisms by which people analyze situations involving chance are an intricate product of evolutionary factors, brain structure, personal experience, knowledge, and emotion. In fact, the human response to uncertainty is so complex that sometimes different structures within the brain come to different conclusions and apparently fight it out to determine which one will dominate. For example, if your face swells to five times its normal size three out of every four times you eat shrimp, the「logical」left hemisphere of your brain will attempt to find a pattern. The「intuitive」right hemisphere of your brain, on the other hand, will simply say「avoid shrimp.」At least that’s what researchers found in less painful experimental setups. The game is called probability guessing. In lieu of toying with shrimp and histamine, subjects are shown a series of cards or lights, which can have two colors, say green and red. Things are arranged so that the colors will appear with different probabilities but otherwise without a pattern. For example, red might appear twice as often as green in a sequence like red-red-green-red-green-red-red-green-green-red-red-red, and so on. The task of the subject, after watching for a while, is to predict whether each new member of the sequence will be red or green.

The game has two basic strategies. One is to always guess the color that you notice occurs more frequently. That is the route favored by rats and other nonhuman animals. If you employ this strategy, you are guaranteed a certain degree of success but you are also conceding that you will do no better. For instance, if green shows up 75 percent of the time and you decide to always guess green, you will be correct 75 percent of the time. The other strategy is to「match」your proportion of green and red guesses to the proportion of green and red you observed in the past. If the greens and reds appear in a pattern and you can figure out the pattern, this strategy enables you to guess right every time. But if the colors appear at random, you would be better off sticking with the first strategy. In the case where green randomly appears 75 percent of the time, the second strategy will lead to the correct guess only about 6 times in 10.

Humans usually try to guess the pattern, and in the process we allow ourselves to be outperformed by a rat. But there are people with certain types of post-surgical brain impairment — called a split brain — that precludes the right and left hemispheres of the brain from communicating with each other. If the probability experiment is performed on these patients such that they see the colored light or card with only their left eye and employ only their left hand to signal their predictions, it amounts to an experiment on the right side of the brain. But if the experiment is performed so as to involve only their right eye and right hand, it is an experiment on the left brain. When researchers performed those experiments, they found that — in the same patients — the right hemisphere always chose to guess the more frequent color and the left hemisphere always tried to guess the pattern.3

Making wise assessments and choices in the face of uncertainty is a rare skill. But like any skill, it can be improved with experience. In the pages that follow, I will examine the role of chance in the world around us, the ideas that have been developed over the centuries to help us understand that role, and the factors that often lead us astray. The British philosopher and mathematician Bertrand Russell wrote,

We all start from「naive realism,」i.e., the doctrine that things are what they seem. We think that grass is green, that stones are hard, and that snow is cold. But physics assures us that the greenness of grass, the hardness of stones, and the coldness of snow are not the greenness of grass, the hardness of stones, and the coldness of snow that we know in our own experience, but something very different.4 In what follows we will peer at life through the eyepiece of randomness and see that many of the events of our lives, too, are not quite what they seem but rather something very different.

IN 2002 THE NOBEL COMMITTEE awarded the Nobel Prize in Economics to a scientist named Daniel Kahneman. Economists do all sorts of things these days — they explain why teachers are paid so little, why football teams are worth so much, and why bodily functions help set a limit on the size of hog farms (a hog excretes three to five times as much as a human, so a farm with thousands of hogs on it often produces more waste than the neighboring cities).5 Despite all the great research generated by economists, the 2002 Nobel Prize was notable because Kahneman is not an economist. He is a psychologist, and for decades, with the late Amos Tversky, Kahneman studied and clarified the kinds of misperceptions of randomness that fuel many of the common fallacies I will talk about in this book.

The greatest challenge in understanding the role of randomness in life is that although the basic principles of randomness arise from everyday logic, many of the consequences that follow from those principles prove counterintuitive. Kahneman and Tversky’s studies were themselves spurred by a random event. In the mid-1960s, Kahneman, then a junior psychology professor at Hebrew University, agreed to perform a rather unexciting chore: lecturing to a group of Israeli air force flight instructors on the conventional wisdom of behavior modification and its application to the psychology of flight training. Kahneman drove home the point that rewarding positive behavior works but punishing mistakes does not. One of his students interrupted, voicing an opinion that would lead Kahneman to an epiphany and guide his research for decades.6

「I’ve often praised people warmly for beautifully executed maneuvers, and the next time they always do worse,」the flight instructor said.「And I’ve screamed at people for badly executed maneuvers, and by and large the next time they improve. Don’t tell me that reward works and punishment doesn’t work. My experience contradicts it.」The other flight instructors agreed. To Kahneman the flight instructors’ experiences rang true. On the other hand, Kahneman believed in the animal experiments that demonstrated that reward works better than punishment. He ruminated on this apparent paradox. And then it struck him: the screaming preceded the improvement, but contrary to appearances it did not cause it.

How can that be? The answer lies in a phenomenon called regression toward the mean. That is, in any series of random events an extraordinary event is most likely to be followed, due purely to chance, by a more ordinary one. Here is how it works: The student pilots all had a certain personal ability to fly fighter planes. Raising their skill level involved many factors and required extensive practice, so although their skill was slowly improving through flight training, the change wouldn’t be noticeable from one maneuver to the next. Any especially good or especially poor performance was thus mostly a matter of luck. So if a pilot made an exceptionally good landing — one far above his normal level of performance — then the odds would be good that he would perform closer to his norm — that is, worse — the next day. And if his instructor had praised him, it would appear that the praise had done no good. But if a pilot made an exceptionally bad landing — running the plane off the end of the runway and into the vat of corn chowder in the base cafeteria — then the odds would be good that the next day he would perform closer to his norm — that is, better. And if his instructor had a habit of screaming「you clumsy ape」when a student performed poorly, it would appear that his criticism did some good. In this way an apparent pattern would emerge: student performs well, praise does no good; student performs poorly, instructor compares student to lower primate at high volume, student improves. The instructors in Kahneman’s class had concluded from such experiences that their screaming was a powerful educational tool. In reality it made no difference at all.

This error in intuition spurred Kahneman’s thinking. He wondered, are such misconceptions universal? Do we, like the flight instructors, believe that harsh criticism improves our children’s behavior or our employees’ performance? Do we make other misjudgments when faced with uncertainty? Kahneman knew that human beings, by necessity, employ certain strategies to reduce the complexity of tasks of judgment and that intuition about probabilities plays an important part in that process. Will you feel sick after eating that luscious-looking seviche tostada from the street vendor? You don’t consciously recall all the comparable food stands you’ve patronized, count the number of times you’ve spent the following night guzzling Pepto-Bismol, and come up with a numerical estimate. You let your intuition do the work. But research in the 1950s and early ’60s indicated that people’s intuition about randomness fails them in such situations. How widespread, Kahneman wondered, was this misunderstanding of uncertainty? And what are its implications for human decision making? A few years passed, and Kahneman invited a fellow junior professor, Amos Tversky, to give a guest lecture at one of his seminars. Later, at lunch, Kahneman mentioned his developing ideas to Tversky. Over the next thirty years, Tversky and Kahneman found that even among sophisticated subjects, when it came to random processes — whether in military or sports situations, business quandaries, or medical questions — people’s beliefs and intuition very often let them down.

Suppose four publishers have rejected the manuscript for your thriller about love, war, and global warming. Your intuition and the bad feeling in the pit of your stomach might say that the rejections by all those publishing experts mean your manuscript is no good. But is your intuition correct? Is your novel unsellable? We all know from experience that if several tosses of a coin come up heads, it doesn’t mean we are tossing a two-headed coin. Could it be that publishing success is so unpredictable that even if our novel is destined for the best-seller list, numerous publishers could miss the point and send those letters that say thanks but no thanks? One book in the 1950s was rejected by publishers, who responded with such comments as「very dull,」「a dreary record of typical family bickering, petty annoyances and adolescent emotions,」and「even if the work had come to light five years ago, when the subject [World War II] was timely, I don’t see that there would have been a chance for it.」That book, The Diary of a Young Girl by Anne Frank, has sold 30 million copies, making it one of the best-selling books in history. Rejection letters were also sent to Sylvia Plath because「there certainly isn’t enough genuine talent for us to take notice,」to George Orwell for Animal Farm because「it is impossible to sell animal stories in the U.S.,」and to Isaac Bashevis Singer because「it’s Poland and the rich Jews again.」Before he hit it big, Tony Hillerman’s agent dumped him, advising that he should「get rid of all that Indian stuff.」7

Those were not isolated misjudgments. In fact, many books destined for great success had to survive not just rejection, but repeated rejection. For example, few books today are considered to have more obvious and nearly universal appeal than the works of John Grisham, Theodor Geisel (Dr. Seuss), and J. K. Rowling. Yet the manuscripts they wrote before they became famous — all eventually hugely successful — were all repeatedly rejected. John Grisham’s manuscript for A Time to Kill was rejected by twenty-six publishers; his second manuscript, for The Firm, drew interest from publishers only after a bootleg copy circulating in Hollywood drew a `$`600,000 offer for the movie rights. Dr. Seuss’s first children’s book, And to Think That I Saw It on Mulberry Street, was rejected by twenty-seven publishers. And J. K. Rowling’s first Harry Potter manuscript was rejected by nine.8 Then there is the other side of the coin — the side anyone in the business knows all too well: the many authors who had great potential but never made it, John Grishams who quit after the first twenty rejections or J. K. Rowlings who gave up after the first five. After his many rejections, one such writer, John Kennedy Toole, lost hope of ever getting his novel published and committed suicide. His mother persevered, however, and eleven years later A Confederacy of Dunces was published; it won the Pulitzer Prize for Fiction and has sold nearly 2 million copies.

There exists a vast gulf of randomness and uncertainty between the creation of a great novel — or piece of jewelry or chocolate-chip cookie — and the presence of huge stacks of that novel — or jewelry or bags of cookies — at the front of thousands of retail outlets. That’s why successful people in every field are almost universally members of a certain set — the set of people who don’t give up.

A lot of what happens to us — success in our careers, in our investments, and in our life decisions, both major and minor — is as much the result of random factors as the result of skill, preparedness, and hard work. So the reality that we perceive is not a direct reflection of the people or circumstances that underlie it but is instead an image blurred by the randomizing effects of unforeseeable or fluctuating external forces. That is not to say that ability doesn’t matter — it is one of the factors that increase the chances of success — but the connection between actions and results is not as direct as we might like to believe. Thus our past is not so easy to understand, nor is our future so easy to predict, and in both enterprises we benefit from looking beyond the superficial explanations.

We habitually underestimate the effects of randomness. Our stockbroker recommends that we invest in the Latin American mutual fund that「beat the pants off the domestic funds」five years running. Our doctor attributes that increase in our triglycerides to our new habit of enjoying a Hostess Ding Dong with milk every morning after dutifully feeding the kids a breakfast of mangoes and nonfat yogurt. We may or may not take our stockbroker’s or doctor’s advice, but few of us question whether he or she has enough data to give it. In the political world, the economic world, the business world — even when careers and millions of dollars are at stake — chance events are often conspicuously misinterpreted as accomplishments or failures.

Hollywood provides a nice illustration. Are the rewards (and punishments) of the Hollywood game deserved, or does luck play a far more important role in box office success (and failure) than people imagine? We all understand that genius doesn’t guarantee success, but it’s seductive to assume that success must come from genius. Yet the idea that no one can know in advance whether a film will hit or miss has been an uncomfortable suspicion in Hollywood at least since the novelist and screenwriter William Goldman enunciated it in his classic 1983 book Adventures in the Screen Trade. In that book, Goldman quoted the former studio executive David Picker as saying,「If I had said yes to all the projects I turned down, and no to all the other ones I took, it would have worked out about the same.」9

That’s not to say that a jittery homemade horror video could become a hit just as easily as, say, Exorcist: The Beginning, which cost an estimated `$`80 million. Well, actually, that is what happened some years back with The Blair Witch Project: it cost the filmmakers a mere `$`60,000 but brought in `$`140 million in domestic box office revenue — more than three times the business of Exorcist. Still, that’s not what Goldman was saying. He was referring only to professionally made Hollywood films with production values good enough to land the film a respectable distributor. And Goldman didn’t deny that there are reasons for a film’s box office performance. But he did say that those reasons are so complex and the path from green light to opening weekend so vulnerable to unforeseeable and uncontrollable influences that educated guesses about an unmade film’s potential aren’t much better than flips of a coin.

Examples of Hollywood’s unpredictability are easy to find. Movie buffs will remember the great expectations the studios had for the megaflops Ishtar (Warren Beatty + Dustin Hoffman + a `$`55 million budget = `$`14 million in box office revenue) and Last Action Hero (Arnold Schwarzenegger + `$`85 million = `$`50 million). On the other hand, you might recall the grave doubts that executives at Universal Studios had about the young director George Lucas’s film American Graffiti, shot for less than `$`1 million. Despite their skepticism, it took in `$`115 million, but still that didn’t stop them from having even graver doubts about Lucas’s next idea. He called the story Adventures of Luke Starkiller as taken from「The Journal of the Whills.」Universal called it unproducible. Ultimately 20th Century Fox made the film, but the studio’s faith in the project went only so far: it paid Lucas just `$`200,000 to write and direct it; in exchange, Lucas received the sequel and merchandising rights. In the end, Star Wars took in `$`461 million on a budget of `$`13 million, and Lucas had himself an empire.

Given the fact that green light decisions are made years before a film is completed and films are subject to many unpredictable factors that arise during those years of production and marketing, not to mention the inscrutable tastes of the audience, Goldman’s theory doesn’t seem at all far-fetched. (It is also one that is supported by much recent economic research.)10 Despite all this, studio executives are not judged by the bread-and-butter management skills that are as essential to the head of the United States Steel Corporation as they are to the head of Paramount Pictures. Instead, they are judged by their ability to pick hits. If Goldman is right, that ability is mere illusion, and in spite of his or her swagger no executive is worth that `$`25 million contract.

Deciding just how much of an outcome is due to skill and how much to luck is not a no-brainer. Random events often come like the raisins in a box of cereal — in groups, streaks, and clusters. And although Fortune is fair in potentialities, she is not fair in outcomes. That means that if each of 10 Hollywood executives tosses 10 coins, although each has an equal chance of being the winner or the loser, in the end there will be winners and losers. In this example, the chances are 2 out of 3 that at least 1 of the executives will score 8 or more heads or tails.

Imagine that George Lucas makes a new Star Wars film and in one test market decides to perform a crazy experiment. He releases the identical film under two titles: Star Wars: Episode A and Star Wars: Episode B. Each film has its own marketing campaign and distribution schedule, with the corresponding details identical except that the trailers and ads for one film say Episode A and those for the other, Episode B. Now we make a contest out of it. Which film will be more popular? Say we look at the first 20,000 moviegoers and record the film they choose to see (ignoring those die-hard fans who will go to both and then insist there were subtle but meaningful differences between the two). Since the films and their marketing campaigns are identical, we can mathematically model the game this way: Imagine lining up all the viewers in a row and flipping a coin for each viewer in turn. If the coin lands heads up, he or she sees Episode A; if the coin lands tails up, it’s Episode B. Because the coin has an equal chance of coming up either way, you might think that in this experimental box office war each film should be in the lead about half the time. But the mathematics of randomness says otherwise: the most probable number of changes in the lead is 0, and it is 88 times more probable that one of the two films will lead through all 20,000 customers than it is that, say, the lead continuously seesaws.11 The lesson is not that there is no difference between films but that some films will do better than others even if all the films are identical.

Such issues are not discussed in corporate boardrooms, in Hollywood, or elsewhere, and so the typical patterns of randomness — apparent hot or cold streaks or the bunching of data into clusters — are routinely misinterpreted and, worse, acted on as if they represented a new trend.

One of the most high profile examples of anointment and regicide in modern Hollywood was the case of Sherry Lansing, who ran Paramount with great success for many years.12 Under Lansing, Paramount won Best Picture awards for Forrest Gump, Braveheart, and Titanic and posted its two highest-grossing years ever. Then Lansing’s reputation suddenly plunged, and she was dumped after Paramount experienced, as Variety put it,「a long stretch of underperformance at the box office.」13

In mathematical terms there is both a short and a long explanation for Lansing’s fate. First, the short answer. Look at this series of percentages: 11.4, 10.6, 11.3, 7.4, 7.1, 6.7. Notice something? Lansing’s boss, Sumner Redstone, did too, and for him the trend was significant, for those six numbers represented the market share of Paramount’s Motion Picture Group for the final six years of Lansing’s tenure. The trend caused BusinessWeek to speculate that Lansing「may simply no longer have Hollywood’s hot hand.」14 Soon Lansing announced she was leaving, and a few months later a talent manager named Brad Grey was brought on board.

How can a surefire genius lead a company through seven great years and then fail practically overnight? There were plenty of theories explaining Lansing’s early success. While Paramount was doing well, Lansing was praised for making it one of Hollywood’s best-run studios and for her knack for turning conventional stories into `$`100 million hits. When her fortune changed, the revisionists took over. Her penchant for making successful remakes and sequels became a drawback. Most damning of all, perhaps, was the notion that her failure was due to her「middle-of-the-road tastes.」She was now blamed for green-lighting such box office dogs as Timeline and Lara Croft Tomb Raider: The Cradle of Life. Suddenly the conventional wisdom was that Lansing was risk averse, old-fashioned, and out of touch with the trends. But can she really be blamed for thinking that a Michael Crichton bestseller would be promising movie fodder? And where were all the Lara Croft critics when the first Tomb Raider film took in `$`131 million in box office revenue?

Even if the theories of Lansing’s shortcomings were plausible, consider how abruptly her demise occurred. Did she become risk averse and out of touch overnight? Because Paramount’s market share plunged that suddenly. One year Lansing was flying high; the next she was a punch line for late-night comedians. Her change of fortune might have been understandable if, like others in Hollywood, she had become depressed over a nasty divorce proceeding, had been charged with embezzlement, or had joined a religious cult. That was not the case. And she certainly hadn’t sustained any damage to her cerebral cortex. The only evidence of Lansing’s newly developed failings that her critics could offer was, in fact, her newly developed failings.

In hindsight it is clear that Lansing was fired because of the industry’s misunderstanding of randomness and not because of her flawed decision making: Paramount’s films for the following year were already in the pipeline when Lansing left the company. So if we want to know roughly how Lansing would have done in some parallel universe in which she remained in her job, all we need to do is look at the data in the year following her departure. With such films as War of the Worlds and The Longest Yard, Paramount had its best summer in a decade and saw its market share rebound to nearly 10 percent. That isn’t merely ironic — it’s again that aspect of randomness called regression toward the mean. A Variety headline on the subject read,「Parting Gifts: Old Regime’s Pics Fuel Paramount Rebound,」15 but one can’t help but think that had Viacom (Paramount’s parent company) had more patience, the headline might have read,「Banner Year Puts Paramount and Lansing’s Career Back on Track.」

Sherry Lansing had good luck at the beginning and bad luck at the end, but it could have been worse. She could have had her bad luck at the beginning. That’s what happened to a Columbia Pictures chief named Mark Canton. Described as box office savvy and enthusiastic shortly after he was hired, he was fired after his first few years produced disappointing box office results. Criticized by one unnamed colleague for being「incapable of distinguishing the winners from the losers」and by another for being「too busy cheerleading,」this disgraced man left in the pipeline when he departed such films as Men in Black (`$`589 million in worldwide box office revenue), Air Force One (`$`315 million), The Fifth Element (`$`264 million), Jerry Maguire (`$`274 million), and Anaconda (`$`137 million). As Variety put it, Canton’s legacy pictures「hit and hit big.」16

Well, that’s Hollywood, a town where Michael Ovitz works as Disney president for fifteen months and then leaves with a `$`140 million severance package and where the studio head David Begelman is fired by Columbia Pictures for forgery and embezzlement and then is hired a few years later as CEO of MGM. But as we’ll see in the following chapters, the same sort of misjudgments that plague Hollywood also plague people’s perceptions in all realms of life.

MY OWN EPIPHANY regarding the hidden effects of randomness came in college, when I took a course in probability and began applying its principles to the sports world. That is easy to do because, as in the film business, most accomplishments in sports are easily quantified and the data are readily available. What I discovered was that just as the lessons of persistence, practice, and teamwork that we learn from sports apply equally to all endeavors of life, so do the lessons of randomness. And so I set out to examine a tale of two baseball sluggers, Roger Maris and Mickey Mantle, a tale that bears a lesson for all of us, even those who wouldn’t know a baseball from a Ping-Pong ball.

The year was 1961. I was barely of reading age, but I still recall the faces of Maris and his more popular New York Yankees teammate, Mantle, on the cover of Life magazine. The two baseball players were engaged in a historic race to tie or break Babe Ruth’s beloved 1927 record of 60 home runs in one year. Those were idealistic times when my teacher would say things like「we need more heroes like Babe Ruth,」or「we never had a crooked president.」Because the legend of Babe Ruth was sacred, anyone who might challenge it had better be worthy. Mantle, a courageous perennial slugger who fought on despite bad knees, was the fans’ — and the press’s — overwhelming favorite. A good-looking, good-natured fellow, Mantle came across as the kind of all-American boy everyone hoped would set records. Maris, on the other hand, was a gruff, private fellow, an underdog who had never hit more than 39 home runs in a year, much less anywhere near 60. He was seen as a nasty sort, someone who didn’t give interviews and didn’t like kids. They all rooted for Mantle. I liked Maris.

As it turned out, Mantle’s knees got the best of him, and he made it to only 54 home runs. Maris broke Ruth’s record with 61. Over his career, Babe Ruth had hit 50 or more home runs in a season four times and twelve times had hit more than anyone else in the league. Maris never again hit 50 or even 40 and never again led the league. That overall performance fed the resentment. As the years went by, Maris was criticized relentlessly by fans, sportswriters, and sometimes other players. Their verdict: he had crumbled under the pressure of being a champion. Said one famous baseball old-timer,「Maris had no right to break Ruth’s record.」17 That may have been true, but not for the reason the old-timer thought.

Many years later, influenced by that college math course, I would learn to think about Maris’s achievement in a new light. To analyze the Ruth-Mantle race I reread that old Life article and found in it a brief discussion of probability theory18 and how it could be used to predict the result of the Maris-Mantle race. I decided to make my own mathematical model of home run hitting. Here’s how it goes: The result of any particular at bat (that is, an opportunity for success) depends primarily on the player’s ability, of course. But it also depends on the interplay of many other factors: his health; the wind, the sun, or the stadium lights; the quality of the pitches he receives; the game situation; whether he correctly guesses how the pitcher will throw; whether his hand-eye coordination works just perfectly as he takes his swing; whether that brunette he met at the bar kept him up too late or the chili-cheese dog with garlic fries he had for breakfast soured his stomach. If not for all the unpredictable factors, a player would either hit a home run on every at bat or fail to do so. Instead, for each at bat all you can say is that he has a certain probability of hitting a home run and a certain probability of failing to hit one. Over the hundreds of at bats he has each year, those random factors usually average out and result in some typical home run production that increases as the player becomes more skillful and then eventually decreases owing to the same process that etches wrinkles in his handsome face. But sometimes the random factors don’t average out. How often does that happen, and how large is the aberration?

From the player’s yearly statistics you can estimate his probability of hitting a home run at each opportunity — that is, on each trip to the plate.19 In 1960, the year before his record year, Roger Maris hit 1 home run for every 14.7 opportunities (about the same as his home run output averaged over his four prime years). Let’s call this performance normal Maris. You can model the home run hitting skill of normal Maris this way: Imagine a coin that comes up heads on average not 1 time every 2 tosses but 1 time every 14.7. Then flip that coin 1 time for every trip to the plate and award Maris 1 home run every time the coin comes up heads. If you want to match, say, Maris’s 1961 season, you flip the coin once for every home run opportunity he had that year. By that method you can generate a whole series of alternative 1961 seasons in which Maris’s skill level matches the home run totals of normal-Maris. The results of those mock seasons illustrate the range of accomplishment that normal Maris could have expected in 1961 if his talent had not spiked — that is, given only his「normal」home run ability plus the effects of pure luck.

To have actually performed this experiment, I’d have needed a rather odd coin, a rather strong wrist, and a leave of absence from college. In practice the mathematics of randomness allowed me to do the analysis employing equations and a computer. In most of my imaginary 1961 seasons, normal Maris’s home run output was, not surprisingly, in the range that was normal for Maris. Some mock seasons he hit a few more, some a few less. Only rarely did he hit a lot more or a lot less. How frequently did normal Maris’s talent produce Ruthian results?

I had expected normal Maris’s chances of matching Ruth’s record to be roughly equal to Jack Whittaker’s when he plopped down an extra dollar as he bought breakfast biscuits at a convenience store a few years back and ended up winning `$`314 million in his state Powerball lottery. That’s what a less talented player’s chances would have been. But normal Maris, though not Ruthian, was still far above average at hitting home runs. And so normal Maris’s probability of producing a record output by chance was not microscopic: he matched or broke Ruth’s record about 1 time every 32 seasons. That might not sound like good odds, and you probably wouldn’t have wanted to bet on either Maris or the year 1961 in particular. But those odds lead to a striking conclusion. To see why, let’s now ask a more interesting question. Let’s consider all players with the talent of normal Maris and the entire seventy-year period from Ruth’s record to the start of the「steroid era」(when, because of players’ drug use, home runs became far more common). What are the odds that some player at some time would have matched or broken Ruth’s record by chance alone? Is it reasonable to believe that Maris just happened to be the recipient of the lucky aberrant season?

History shows that in that period there was about 1 player every 3 years with both the talent and the opportunities comparable to those of normal Maris in 1961. When you add it all up, that makes the probability that by chance alone one of those players would have matched or broken Ruth’s record a little greater than 50 percent. In other words, over a period of seventy years a random spike of 60 or more home runs for a player whose production process merits more like 40 home runs is to be expected — a phenomenon something like that occasional loud crackle you hear amid the static in a bad telephone connection. It is also to be expected, of course, that we will deify, or vilify — and certainly endlessly analyze — whoever that「lucky」person turns out to be.

We can never know for certain whether Maris was a far better player in 1961 than in any of the other years he played professional baseball or whether he was merely the beneficiary of good fortune. But detailed analyses of baseball and other sports by scientists as eminent as the late Stephen Jay Gould and the Nobel laureate E. M. Purcell show that coin-tossing models like the one I’ve described match very closely the actual performance of both players and teams, including their hot and cold streaks.20

When we look at extraordinary accomplishments in sports — or elsewhere — we should keep in mind that extraordinary events can happen without extraordinary causes. Random events often look like nonrandom events, and in interpreting human affairs we must take care not to confuse the two. Though it has taken many centuries, scientists have learned to look beyond apparent order and recognize the hidden randomness in both nature and everyday life. In this chapter I’ve presented a few glimpses of those workings. In the following chapters I shall consider the central ideas of randomness within their historical context and describe their relevance with the aim of offering a new perspective on our everyday surroundings and hence a better understanding of the connection between this fundamental aspect of nature and our own experience.

## Notes

1 Kerstin Preuschoff, Peter Bossaerts, and Steven R. Quartz,「Neural Differentiation of Expected Reward and Risk in Human Subcortical Structures,」Neuron 51 (August 3, 2006): 381–90.

2 Benedetto De Martino et al.,「Frames, Biases, and Rational Decision-Making in the Human Brain,」Science 313 (August 4, 2006): 684–87.

3 George Wolford, Michael B. Miller, and Michael Gazzaniga,「The Left Hemisphere’s Role in Hypothesis Formation,」Journal of Neuroscience 20: RC64 (2000): 1–4.

4 Bertrand Russell, An Inquiry into Meaning and Truth (1950; repr., Oxford: Routledge, 1996), p. 15.

5 Matt Johnson and Tom Hundt,「Hog Industry Targets State for Good Reason,」Vernon County ( Wisconsin ) Broadcaster, July 17, 2007.

6 Kevin McKean,「Decisions, Decisions,」Discover, June 1985, pp. 22–31.

7 David Oshinsky,「No Thanks, Mr. Nabokov,」New York Times Book Review, September 9, 2007.

8 Press accounts of the number of rejections these manuscripts received vary slightly.

9 William Goldman, Adventures in the Screen Trade (New York: Warner Books, 1983), p. 41.

10 See Arthur De Vany, Hollywood Economics (Abington, U.K.: Routledge, 2004).

11 William Feller, An Introduction to Probability Theory and Its Applications, 2nd ed. (New York: John Wiley and Sons, 1957), p. 68. Note that for simplicity’s sake, when the opponents are tied, Feller defines the lead as belonging to the player who led at the preceding trial.

12 Leonard Mlodinow,「Meet Hollywood’s Latest Genius,」Los Angeles Times Magazine, July 2, 2006.

13 Dave McNary,「Par Goes for Grey Matter,」Variety, January 2, 2005.

14 Ronald Grover,「Paramount’s Cold Snap: The Heat Is On,」BusinessWeek, November 21, 2003.

15 Dave McNary,「Parting Gifts: Old Regime’s Pics Fuel Paramount Rebound,」Variety, August 16, 2005.

16 Anita M. Busch,「Canton Inks Prod’n Pact at Warner’s,」Variety, August 7, 1997.

17「The Making of a Hero,」Time, September 29, 1961, p. 72. The old-timer was Rogers Hornsby.

18「Mickey Mantle and Roger Maris: The Photographic Essay,」Life, August 18, 1961, p. 62.

19 For those who don’t know baseball, the plate is a rubber slab embedded in the ground, which a player stands before as he attempts to hit the ball. For those who do know baseball, please note that I included walks in my definition of opportunities. If the calculation is redone employing just official at bats, the result is about the same.

20 See Stephen Jay Gould,「The Streak of Streaks,」New York Review of Books, August 18, 1988, pp. 8–12 (we’ll come back to their work in more detail later). A compelling and mathematically detailed analysis of coin-toss models in sports appears in chapter 2 of a book in progress by Charles M. Grinstead, William P. Peterson, and J. Laurie Snell, tentatively titled Fat Chance; www.math.dartmouth.edu/-prob/prob/NEW/bestofchance.pdf.

0101透过随机性的目镜凝视

记得还是十来岁的时候，我曾经看着黄色的安息日烛火，在为它供应燃料的白色石蜡圆柱上随意地舞动着。我那时还太年轻，感受不到烛光的浪漫之处，但那烛火形成的摇曳影像，仍然使我体会到了烛光的不可思议。烛火飘忽不定，变幻无方，时而大时而小，但我看不到造成这些变化的明显的原因或安排。当时的我相信，那火焰后面一定有其节奏和成因，有一种科学家能用数学方程来预测和解释的模式。「生活可不是这样。」父亲却这么说，「有些无法预见的事情，有时照样会发生。」接着他说起他被关押、受饿的布痕瓦尔德纳粹集中营。有一次，他在面包铺里偷了一块面包。面包铺的面包师傅让盖世太保把所有嫌犯都集中起来，排成一排。「是谁偷了面包？」面包师傅问。要是没有人回答，他就会让卫兵把嫌犯们一个接一个地枪毙，直到人被杀光，或者有人出来认罪为止。父亲不想让其他人搭上一条性命，于是他站了出来。父亲并不想给自己加上些英雄主义的光环，他说他之所以这么做，不过是因为他知道不管怎样自己都会被枪毙。可是面包师傅并没有叫士兵打死我父亲，反而让他当了助手，而且待遇优厚。「纯属运气，」父亲说，「这跟你怎么做毫无关系。不过如果事情不是这样的话，你就永远都不会出生了。」我不由得深感震惊：我的存在竟然归功于希特勒！德国人杀害了我父亲的妻子和两个年幼的孩子，彻底抹去了他的前半辈子。要不是因为战争，我父亲就永远不会移民到纽约，永远不会遇到同样身为难民的我的母亲，当然也永远不会生下我和我的两个兄弟。

父亲很少谈及那场战争。当时我并未察觉，只是多年后才开始慢慢认识到一点，那就是当父亲谈起他痛苦的过去时，他并不是希望我只知道这些经历，他更想给我上一堂关于生命的大课。战争是种极端情况，但运气在生活中扮演的角色并非仅限于这种极端状况。如同那烛火一般，我们命运的主线总是会被各种各样的随机事件牵引到新的方向，这些随机事件 —— 以及我们对它们做出的反应 —— 决定了我们的命运。这个事实带来的结果，就是我们既难以预测，也难以解释人生。在注视相同的罗夏墨迹时，你可能会看到麦当娜，但在我的眼中，它却是只鸭嘴兽。同样，那些商务、法律、医药、体育和媒体领域中的数据，或者孩子的三年级成绩单，也都能以多种方式被解读。不过要解释偶然性在某个事件中扮演的角色，可不像解释罗夏墨迹那样无所谓对错：这些对偶然性的解释，有的是对的，有的则是错的。

在面对不确定的局面时，我们对局势的评估和做出的选择常常依赖于直觉。当碰到一只面带微笑的剑齿虎时，我们会如何判断它的微笑，是因为它心宽体胖，还是因为它在饿得半死的时候看到了我们 —— 它面前的一顿美餐？在这种情况下，我们的本能给出的处理方式无疑是更有进化优势的。但到了现代世界，不同物种之间的力量对比已经完全不同了，因此同样的本能到了今天就会有其缺点。用本能的惯性思维去对待今天的老虎，就可能导致并非最佳甚至是不妥当的决策。在大脑对不确定性的处理方式上，研究者认为这个结论毫无奇怪之处：许多研究已经表明，人类大脑对不确定局面进行评估的部分，和处理情感这一人类特性 —— 常常也被认为是非理性的主要来源 —— 的部分，两者存在着紧密的联系。

例如，功能性磁共振成像（fMRI）表明，风险和回报是由多巴胺能神经元系统的某些部分来估定的，而多巴胺能神经元系统正是对于动机和情感过程而言非常重要的大脑奖励回路。这些图像还显示，当我们在一个不确定的局面下进行决策时，扁桃体这个同样与人类情绪状态，特别是恐惧感有关的器官，也变得兴奋起来。

人们对涉及偶然性的局势进行分析的机制，是进化因素、大脑构造、个人经验、知识及情感共同形成的复杂产物。事实上，人类对于不确定性的反应是如此复杂，以至某些时候大脑的不同部分会得出不同结论，而最终做出的结论显然是这些部分相互斗争的结果。举个例子，如果每吃四次大虾之后，总有三次我们的脸肿得是正常人的五个大，那么「逻辑的」大脑左半球就会试图找出一个模式描述其中的规律，而「直觉的」大脑右半球则会简单地告诉你：「离虾远点儿！」不管怎么说，研究者通过不那么痛苦、被称为概率猜测的实验游戏得出的就是这个结论。实验提供给受试者的是两种不同颜色 —— 比如绿和红 —— 的卡片或灯光，它们取代了虾和组胺。在实验设置中，这些色彩以不同的概率出现，但除此之外别无其他模式。例如，在红 — 红 — 绿 — 红 — 绿 — 红 — 红 — 绿 — 绿 — 红 — 红 — 红这样的颜色序列中，红色出现的次数是绿色的两倍。受试者的任务是通过一段时间的观察，预测下一次出现的色彩是红还是绿。

在这个游戏中，我们可以有两种基本策略。策略一是以出现最为频繁的那个颜色为猜测结果。老鼠和其他非人类动物就喜欢用这种办法。该策略能够保证一个基本稳定的预测准确率，但同时也满足于这样的准确率而无法进一步提高。根据这种策略，比如绿色出现的比例为 75%，那么总是猜下一个出现的还是绿色，我们的预测准确率就会是 75%。而策略二是试图找到一种绿 / 红色出现的模式，并根据这一模式形成一个与之「匹配」的猜测。如果绿色和红色的出现确实遵循某种模式，而我们又找到这种模式，那么策略二就能以 100% 的准确率做出预测。但如果颜色的出现完全是随机的，那么最好还是坚持使用策略一。举例来说，如果实验中绿色以 75% 的比例随机出现，这时采用策略二，在 10 次中大概只能猜中 6 次。

一般来说，人类都试图揣测红 / 绿出现的模式，这样一来，我们在这个游戏中反而会被老鼠击败。而在实验中研究者更进一步，他们找来一些受试者，这些受试者实际上是遭受了被称为「裂脑」的外科手术术后大脑受损的病人，他们大脑的左右半球之间的通信被切断了。如果让这些病人进行上述实验，就可以分别对大脑的左右两个半球单独进行测试：如果让他们只使用左眼观察彩色灯光或卡片，同时只用左手做出预测，就相当于只对他们的大脑右半球进行实验；而如果是右眼和右手，实验就是针对大脑左半球进行的。在这样的实验中，研究者发现，对于同一个病人，其大脑右半球总是选择仅根据更频繁出现的颜色给出预测，而大脑左半球总是试图寻找颜色变化中的模式。

能够在不确定的情境中做出明智的评估和选择，这是一种罕有的能力。但与任何别的技能一样，我们可以通过经验的累积提高这一能力。在后面的章节中，我将更为深入地探讨偶然性在我们所处世界中扮演的角色；我还将介绍那些历经好几个世纪发展起来的、能够帮助我们理解这一角色的思想，以及常常将我们领入歧路的众多因素。英国哲学家和数学家罗素曾写道：

我们（对事物的认知）都始于「朴素的实在论」，即我们相信事物所是如所见。因此我们认为草是绿色的，石头是坚硬的，雪是冰冷的。但物理学使我们确信，草的绿、石头的硬和雪的冷，其实并非我们通过自身经验所知道的草的绿、石头的硬和雪的冷，而是某种非常不同的东西。

下面，我们可以透过随机性的目镜看到，生活中同样存在着许多事情，它们并非表面所见的那样，而是其他非常不同的东西。

2002 年，诺贝尔委员会将诺贝尔经济学奖授予科学家丹尼尔·卡尼曼。今天的经济学家可是什么问题都会研究的 —— 为什么教师工资那么低？足球队为什么那么值钱？猪的生理功能又是怎样限制了养猪场的规模（一头猪的排泄物是一个人的 3-5 倍，因此，拥有数千头猪的农场，常常能比它旁边的城市产生更多的废物）？ 尽管经济学家进行了这么多了不起的研究，2002 年诺贝尔经济学奖引人注目的一点，却是卡尼曼并非经济学家，他是一名心理学家。在数十年中，他与特沃斯基一道，研究和阐明了多种类型的关于随机性的错误理解，而恰恰是这些误解，造成了本书将要谈及的许多常见的谬误。

要理解随机性在生活中扮演的角色，我们面临的最大挑战在于，尽管随机性的基本原则脱胎于日常的逻辑，但它带来的许多后果是反直觉的。卡尼曼和特沃斯基的研究本身就是由一个随机事件引发的。20 世纪 60 年代中期，当时还是希伯来大学心理学初级教授的卡尼曼，接受了一桩相当无趣的杂差：为一群以色列空军飞行教官讲授有关行为矫正的经典理论及其在飞行训练心理学中的应用。卡尼曼强调指出，对正确的行为进行奖励能起到矫正作用，而惩罚错误行为却没有同样的效果。这时一名学员打断了他，并说出自己的看法。这个看法使卡尼曼恍然大悟，并在之后的几十年引导了他的研究。

「当我的飞行员做出漂亮的动作时，我总是毫不吝惜溢美之词，但他们的下一次飞行总是变得更加糟糕，」这名飞行教官说道，「当他们飞得很糟糕时，我就会对着他们一通大吼，而他们的下一次飞行一般总要更好一些。所以请别说奖励有效而惩罚无效，我的经验可并非如此。」其他教官都同意这一看法。在卡尼曼看来，飞行教官的经历听来不假，但他同样坚信由动物实验得出的奖励比惩罚更有效的结论。面对这个明显的悖论，他陷入沉思，接着一个念头冒了出来：在飞行员的飞行水平得到改善之前，教官确实是在大吼大叫，但在这个表象之后，我们不能说这些吼叫就是使得飞行员飞行水平得到改善的原因。

这是什么道理呢？答案要从一种被称为回归的现象中去寻找。所谓回归是指，在任何一系列随机事件中，跟在一个不寻常的事件之后的，更可能是一个相对而言更加普通的事件，而这种情况的发生完全出于偶然。飞行教官例子中的回归是这样的：每个学员都已经具备一定的驾驶战斗机的能力。飞行技术水平的提高跟很多因素有关，并且需要大量的练习。尽管他们的飞行技术通过训练得以慢慢提高，但这一提高是很难通过紧接着的两次飞行来察觉的。因此那些特别好或特别差的表现，基本都是运气造成的。如果飞行员进行了一次远好于正常水平的优异着陆，那么第二天他的表现更加正常的机会就很高 —— 换言之，第二天的表现要比今天更差一些。如果教官这次表扬了他，那么到了第二天，这个表扬似乎也没起到正面作用。而如果飞行员的这次着陆差得「不同凡响」，飞机直冲出跑道，一头栽进自助餐厅盛玉米杂烩的大桶里，那么他同样会以很高的概率在第二天飞得更接近正常水平 —— 也就是飞得更好。假设教官按惯例因为其糟糕的表现而大叫「你这头蠢猩猩！」，那么这个咒骂表面上看来就收到了好效果。这样一来，就出现了一种表面上的模式：学员飞得好，表扬就没有好效果；反而是让教官高分贝地用低等灵长类来相提并论的糟糕表现，却会在训斥之后表现出进步。卡尼曼课上的那些飞行教官，就从这样的经验中得出结论，即高声训斥是一种有力的教育工具。但实际上，这些大吼大叫根本就没有改变什么。

这个由直觉导致的错误，使得卡尼曼陷入思索。这样的误解是不是一种普遍现象呢？我们是不是也像这些教官一样，相信粗暴的批评能改善孩子的行为或雇员的表现？当面对不确定性时，我们还有没有别的误判？卡尼曼知道，出于必要，人类采用一些策略来降低判断的复杂性，而对概率的直觉反应在其中扮演了重要角色。你是否也曾有过这样的经历，在享用了从路边摊购买的看似甘甜可口的酸橘汁腌鱼炸玉米粉圆饼后觉得不舒服？在发生了这样的情况之后，你并不会有意识地回想自己到底在多少个这样的路边摊掏过腰包，并且数一数在这样大吃一顿之后，晚上猛灌碱式水杨酸铋的次数，并以此算出在这个摊子上中招的概率估计值。事实上，你的整个判断都是由直觉完成的。不过 20 世纪 50 年代与 60 年代早期的研究告诉我们，在这种情况下，人们对随机性的直觉常常会带来失败的结果。卡尼曼因此思忖道，我们对于不确定性的误解到底有多广泛呢？对于人类决策而言，这又意味着什么？几年后，卡尼曼邀请了一位同事特沃斯基，在研究小组的学术例会上进行了一次讲座。讲座结束后，卡尼曼在午餐时向特沃斯基说出了他正在酝酿的想法。之后的 30 年，特沃斯基和卡尼曼发现，即使是经验丰富的受试者，在面临随机性过程（不论是军事或体育比赛中的局势，生意上的窘境，还是医疗方面的疑问）时，人类的信念和直觉也常常有负所托，未能给出好的决策。

让我们设想一下，你写了一部关于爱情、战争和全球变暖的惊悚小说，但它已经被 4 个出版商退了稿。你的直觉，还有你那堵得发慌的胸口大概都在说，这些出版业专家的拒绝，一定意味着稿子确实一无是处。但是这种直觉是否正确？你的小说真的就卖不出去了吗？我们根据自己的经验，都知道在扔硬币时，哪怕接连好几次扔出来的都是正面朝上，也不意味着硬币的两面都是正面图案。对于一部出版物而言，要预测它的成功是不是也如此之难，以至即使它将来一定会登上畅销书榜单，也会有许多出版商看不到它的闪光点，还寄出那些写满了「谢谢（来稿）」和「不，（出版就算了）谢谢」的信？

20 世纪 50 年代，就有这么一本书，不但被多个出版商退稿，还得到了诸如「乏味透顶」、「典型的关于家庭内部那些鸡毛蒜皮的吵闹、微不足道的烦恼以及青春期情感的沉闷记录」，以及「哪怕这本书在 5 年前趁着主题（第二次世界大战）热度还在的时候问世，我也看不出它有任何应该出版的机会」之类的评语。但安妮·弗兰克的这本《安妮日记》至今已卖出 3000 万册，并成为有史以来最畅销的图书之一。这类退稿信还被寄给西尔维娅·普拉斯，因为她「肯定没有足够的真正的天分引起我们的注意」；乔治·奥威尔的《动物庄园》遭到退稿的原因则是「动物故事书在美国可没法卖出去」；而由于「又是波兰和犹太富人（的故事）」，艾萨克·巴什维斯·辛格也被退了稿。走红之前的托尼·席勒曼更是为代理商所抛弃，并得到「把所有那些美洲原住民的玩意儿都去掉」的建议。

这些都不是孤立的误判。实际上，许多日后大获成功的作品，都不得不在退稿中苦等着出头之日 —— 而且不是一次被退稿，是一次又一次被退稿。举例来说，与约翰·格里森姆、西奥多·盖泽尔（苏斯博士）和罗琳的作品相比，现在大概没有几本书会有那样明显而全方位的吸引力。但在成名之前，他们的手稿都遭到一次次的退稿。格里森姆的《杀戮时刻》被 26 个出版商退了稿，而他的第二部作品《糖衣陷阱》之所以能够引起出版商的兴趣，完全是因为它的私抄本已经在好莱坞广为流传，且得到 60 万美元的电影版权费。苏斯博士的第一部儿童读物《桑树街见闻》被 27 个出版商退稿。而罗琳的《哈利·波特》第一部的手稿也被退稿 9 次。与这些后来终于成功的人相对的，则是作家这个行当中人所共知的硬币的另一面：那许许多多潜力无穷却终未成功的作者 —— 那最初 20 次退稿后就封笔的格里森姆们，或在最初 5 次退稿后就放弃的罗琳们。其中的一位 —— 约翰·肯尼迪·图尔 —— 在经历了多次退稿之后，对自己作品的出版彻底绝望，并选择了自杀。他的母亲保留了他的手稿。11 年后，《笨蛋联盟》出版，并获得了普利策小说奖，售出近 200 万本。

一部伟大小说的创作（或者一件珠宝，又或者一块撒着巧克力碎的曲奇饼），和这部小说成书后在几千家书店里高高码起的书堆（或成套的珠宝或成袋的曲奇饼），这两者间有着一道随机性和不确定性的鸿沟。正是这道鸿沟，使我们看到各领域的成功人士几乎毫无例外都属于特定的一类人，那就是从不放弃的人。

发生在我们身上的许多事情 —— 职场、投资和生活中或大或小的决策的成功 —— 都是随机性的结果。这些随机因素的影响一点儿都不比我们本身的能力、勤奋和为机会所做的准备的影响来得小。因此，我们所认知的现实，并不是人或环境的直接反映，而是被不可预见或不断变化的外部力量随机扭曲后的模糊映像。这并不是说能力就无关紧要了 —— 能力正是增加我们成功机会的因素之一，但行动与结果之间的联系，可能并非我们所见的那般直接。因此，理解过去并不容易，但预测未来同样不容易。无论是理解过去还是预测未来，如果我们能超越肤浅的解释去观察，我们都将受益匪浅。

我们总是习惯性地低估随机性的影响。股票经纪人会推荐我们投资拉美共同基金，因为在过去 5 年的时间里，它的收益「吊打美国国内基金」；而我们血脂水平的升高则被医生归咎于我们的新习惯，而这个新习惯不过是在我们尽职尽责地给孩子们喂了一顿杧果加脱脂酸奶的早餐后，用一块搭配牛奶的家庭自制夹心蛋糕来犒劳一下自己罢了。股票经纪人或医生提出的建议，我们可能会接受，也可能不会，但是不管是否接受，都很少有人会去考虑这些建议是否有足够的数据支撑。在政治、经济和商业圈中，哪怕是在整个职业生涯或数百万美元被放在台面上让人做出孤注一掷的选择时，我们也常常把偶然事件明显错误地解释为成功或失败的原因。

好莱坞就是这方面的一个好例子。在好莱坞的金钱游戏中，赏（与罚）是否确有所值？还是说在票房的成功（与失败）中，运气扮演的角色实际上比人们一贯认为的要重要得多？我们都能理解天赋并不能保证带来成功，但另一方面，认为成功必然来自天赋的想法则颇有诱惑性。不过一直徘徊在好莱坞的一个令人不快的疑虑，就是一部影片能否大卖实际上没有人能够预知。小说家与剧作家威廉·高德曼 1983 年在其经典之作《银幕产业大冒险》中阐明了这个疑虑，之后它就一直在好莱坞徘徊着。高德曼在书中引用了前电影监制戴维·皮克尔的话：「如果我对所有我毙掉的片子说‘行’，而对我放行的片子说‘不行’，恐怕最后的票房结果也不会差多少。」

这并不是说一部家庭作坊小制作的神经兮兮的恐怖电影会与比如耗资 8000 万美元的《驱魔人前传》同样容易成为票房明星，虽然这种事情实际上在若干年前的确发生过：《女巫布莱尔》只花了制片人 6 万美元，却带来了 1.4 亿美元的美国国内票房收入，是《驱魔人前传》的 3 倍还多。不过高德曼所说的并不是这种情况，他仅考虑专业制作且影片质量足够好、得以由著名发行商来发行的好莱坞影片。高德曼并不否认电影的票房表现受多种因素的影响，不过他真正想说的，是这些影响因素是如此复杂，而一部电影从获准开拍到周末首映的路途，又是如此容易受到不可预见和不可控制的因素的干扰，因此，根据多个影响因素预测一部尚未杀青的电影的票房潜力，其实并不比靠扔硬币来猜测要好多少。

不可预测性的例子在好莱坞并不难找。影迷们应该还记得电影公司对百万美元大作《伊斯达》（沃伦·比蒂 + 达斯汀·霍夫曼 + 5500 万美元预算 = 1400 万美元票房收入）和《幻影英雄》（阿诺·施瓦辛格 + 8500 万美元 = 5000 万美元票房收入）所抱的期待。另一方面，我们大概也能回想起环球影城的主管们对年轻导演乔治·卢卡斯的《美国风情画》所持的悲观看法。该片的拍摄只花了不到 100 万美元，尽管遭受种种怀疑，它却带来了 1.15 亿美元的收入。不过这个成绩仍然未能阻止主管们对卢卡斯的下一个点子 —— 他自己称为《威尔斯的日记第一部：星际大战之星际杀手路克的探险》的故事 —— 怀有更为悲观的疑虑。按他们的话来说，这部片子根本就没法拍。最终，二十世纪福克斯电影公司拍摄了这部影片，但该公司对这部电影的预期也不过如此：公司付给卢卡斯区区 20 万美元作为编写剧本和导演的报酬；作为交换，卢卡斯获得了影片的续拍和销售权。预算 1300 万美元的《星球大战》最终带来了 4.61 亿美元的收入，而卢卡斯则得到一个帝国。

为一部电影开绿灯放行的决定，一般比影片制作完工要早几年，而在这些进行拍摄和营销的年头中，影片又会受到许多不知从哪里冒出来的不可预测的因素的影响，至于观众那难以揣摩的口味就更不必说了。考虑到这些事实，高德曼的理论就毫无牵强之处了（该理论同样得到经济界更近期研究的支持）。尽管如此，对电影公司行政主管们的评价，却并非基于其实际的管理能力，虽然这些能力对于美国钢铁公司或派拉蒙的头头们而言，同样至关重要。实际上，电影公司的行政主管所获得的评价，取决于他们能否选中票房热门。如果高德曼的观点是正确的，那么这种能力事实上便是一种错觉，而且无论这些主管如何大吹特吹，他们都配不上那 2500 万美元的合同。

最终的结果应该有多少归于能力，又有多少归于运气呢？这可不是个不动脑子就能得到答案的问题。随机事件常常像一盒麦片中的葡萄干那样抱团出现，并非总是一个个孤立的事件。尽管每个事物的潜能都是由幸运女神公平赐予的，但这些潜能体现在实际结果中可就算不得公平了。如果让 10 个好莱坞主管每人扔 10 次硬币，那么尽管他们有相等的机会成为赢家或输家，但最终总会有某些确定的赢家和输家。在这个扔硬币的例子中，至少有一个人能扔出 8 次或更多的正面或反面朝上的可能性为 2/3。

让我们假设卢卡斯又拍了一部新的《星球大战》，然后在测试市场上做个疯狂的试验。他用两个不同的名字 ——《星战前传 A》和《星战前传 B》—— 发行该片完全相同的两个拷贝，每部都有它自己的市场营销计划和发行安排，并且除了在预演公告和广告中，一个说的是《星战前传 A》而另一个说的是《星战前传 B》，这些计划和安排的细节都完全相同。如果我们让这「两」部影片相互竞争，哪一部会更受欢迎呢？比方让我们记录下最初的 2 万名电影爱好者所选择的影片（让我们忽略那些《星球大战》的死忠粉吧，这些人两部都会看，还会坚持认为两部影片有一些微妙但颇有意义的差别）。由于电影本身及营销策略完全相同，因此，我们可以把这个试验建成如下的数学模型：将这些观众排成一行，然后依次让他们扔硬币，扔出正面朝上就看《星战前传 A》，否则就看《星战前传 B》。由于这枚硬币正面或反面朝上的机会相等，你可能会认为，在这场试验性的票房战争中，每部电影都应该有大概一半的时间在比赛中领先。随机性的数学理论告诉我们的却是另外一回事：最可能出现的领先者发生改变的次数是 0 次，即在这场争夺 2 万名观众的比赛中，两部影片中的某一部会从头到尾始终保持领先，并且这个可能性是两部电影你追我赶、领先权不断换手的可能性的 88 倍。这个例子给我们的教训，并不是说所有影片都毫无差别，而是说哪怕所有的影片都分毫不差，也总会有某些影片比别的影片有更好的票房。

无论是好莱坞还是别的什么地方，待在公司会议室里的人们都不会在讨论中提及这些问题。因此，随机性的典型模式 —— 表面上的「热」或「冷」的曲线，或是抱团出现的数据 —— 都照例被错误地解释了。更糟糕的是，这些模式成为下一步行动的依据，好像它们真的反映了某种新趋势。

现代好莱坞历史上有不少聘用和解聘都非常高调的例子，雪莉·兰辛就是其中之一。兰辛掌管派拉蒙多年，取得了巨大的成功。在她任职期间，派拉蒙靠着《阿甘正传》《勇敢的心》《泰坦尼克》夺得了最佳影片奖，它们也带来了公司历史上收入最高的两年。但兰辛的名声在此后一落千丈，而在派拉蒙经历了如 Variety 杂志所说的「很长时间的票房不佳」之后，她最终被抛弃了。

数学可以对兰辛的命运给出一短一长两种解释。先来看看短的解释，请看看下面这串数字：11.4%、10.6%、11.3%、7.4%、7.1%、6.7%。发现了什么吗？没错，兰辛的老板萨姆纳·雷德斯通也发现了。对他而言，这个趋势已经足够明显，那就是派拉蒙的动作片组在兰辛在任的最后 6 年中所占的市场份额。这个趋势也让《商业周刊》怀疑兰辛「大概就是手不再‘热’了」。不久，兰辛宣布她将离任。几个月后，一个名叫布拉德·格雷的有天分的经理浮出水面。

一名无疑颇有天赋的人，怎么可能在带领公司走过 7 个很棒的年头后，一夜之间就失败了呢？有大量的理论可以解释兰辛早期的成功。当派拉蒙干得不错时，兰辛受到了称赞，因为她造就了好莱坞营运最佳的公司之一，而且还有着将老套的故事转化为 1 亿美元票房的点石成金术。当她的运气变糟后，修正主义者就占了上风。兰辛那重拍老片或续集的倾向，现在变成了一种缺点。各种评论中最为毒辣的，大概得算她的「半吊子品位」导致失败的说法。她因为同意拍摄《时间线》和《古墓丽影 2》这样的票房毒药而饱受指责。兰辛不愿冒险、观念过时、与潮流脱节之类的说法突然就成了主流。但是，预测一部取材于迈克尔·克莱顿畅销书的影片会有可观的票房，难道也有错？而当第一部《古墓丽影》带来 1.31 亿票房的时候，所有那些针对兰辛的批评又在哪里？

即使关于兰辛缺点的那些理论确有道理，她命运的转折也发生得太突然了！难道这个转折是因为她一夜之间变得反对冒险和脱离潮流了吗？不是，这个转折只是因为派拉蒙的市场份额突然下降了。头一年兰辛还高处云端，下一年她就成了午夜剧场喜剧演员用来制造连珠妙语的笑料。如果她跟好莱坞的其他人一样，因为自己不堪的离婚案而变得沮丧，或者因为挪用公款遭到起诉，或者加入了邪教组织之类，那么这种改变多少还能让人理解。但情况并非如此，兰辛显然也没有遭受什么大脑皮质损伤之类的问题。实际上，批评兰辛的评论者所能给出的证据，就只有这些失败本身。

事后来看，兰辛遭到解雇很显然是由于业界对于随机性的误解，而非她的那些有瑕疵的决策：当兰辛离开派拉蒙时，公司次年的影片已经开拍了。因此，如果我们想知道在一个兰辛仍然留任的平行宇宙中她大概做得怎样，只要看看她离职次年的数据就可以了。得益于《世界大战》和《最长的一码》等影片，派拉蒙收获了 10 年中最好的一个夏季票房，市场份额也回弹到近 10%。这不仅是一种讽刺，而且再次体现了随机性那回归均值的一面。Variety 的一篇头条对此的评价是：「分手的礼物：旧领导的影片为派拉蒙注入反弹动力。」但人们仍然会不由自主地认为，如果维亚康姆集团（派拉蒙的母公司）能再多一点点耐心，这个头条可能就会是「标志性的一年将派拉蒙和兰辛的职业生涯拉回正轨」。

兰辛在派拉蒙开始时好运当头，而结束时厄运缠身。不过，她的运气本还有可能更糟：她有可能从一开始就印堂发黑。这事儿就发生在哥伦比亚电影公司主管马克·坎顿身上。在刚被聘用时，他被人们认为是一个对票房了解透彻并充满激情的人，但最初几年令人失望的票房成绩使他遭到解雇。一位不愿透露姓名的同事评价他「没有能力分辨成功和失败的影片」，而另一位则称他「过分忙于呐喊助威」。当这个名誉扫地的人离开时，他在制片流水线上留下了《黑衣人》（5.89 亿美元的全球票房）、《空军一号》（3.15 亿美元）、《第五元素》（2.64 亿美元）、《甜心先生》（2.74 亿美元）和《狂蟒之灾》（1.37 亿美元）等影片。正如 Variety 所言，坎顿的遗产可谓「红得发紫」。

看吧，这就是好莱坞，它是一个迈克尔·奥维兹作为迪士尼总裁工作了 15 个月后，带着 1.4 亿美元解聘红包离开的小城；它也是一个哥伦比亚电影公司负责人戴维·伯格尔曼因伪造罪和挪用公司财产而被解雇，却在几年后被聘为米高梅首席执行官的地方。我们将在后面的章节看到，上述那些毒害了好莱坞的误判，同样扭曲着人们对生活各方面的认识。

我自己对于随机性那隐形影响的顿悟，都来自大学时代。当时我选修了一门概率论的课程，并把其中的数学原理用到体育比赛上。这事儿做起来不难，因为如同在电影业中一样，大多数体育运动的成绩很容易被量化，数据也是现成的。在这个过程中我发现，正如在体育比赛中学到的持之以恒、勤学苦练和团队合作能够被应用到生活各方面的拼搏中一样，从体育比赛中得到的关于随机性的教训也是如此。因此，我接下来要讲一讲棒球手罗杰·马里斯和米奇·曼托的故事。这个故事对所有人来说都有深刻的教育意义，就算你分不清棒球和乒乓球也不要紧。

那是在 1961 年，我刚刚到读书的年纪。但我还能记得《生活》杂志封面上的马里斯，以及他那更受欢迎的纽约洋基队队友曼托的样子。这两名棒球选手在当年展开了一场历史性的竞争，那就是追平或打破 1927 年由贝比·鲁斯创下的 60 个本垒打的纪录。那是一个唯心主义大行其道的时代，我的老师经常会讲一些诸如「我们需要更多像贝比·鲁斯那样的英雄」，或者「我们从来没有过不诚实的总统」之类的话。由于鲁斯的传奇已经被神化，所以任何可能对他形成挑战的人，最好都能配得上「鲁斯的挑战者」这个名头。勇敢、毫不懈怠并承受着膝伤坚持战斗的击球手曼托，是当年球迷和记者毋庸置疑的心头好。曼托长相讨人喜欢，脾气性格也好，他给人一种人人都希望由他来创造纪录的彻头彻尾的美国男孩形象。而另一方面，马里斯却是个粗暴又神秘兮兮的家伙，一个从未在一年中打出多于 39 个本垒打的失败者，而 39 个本垒打离 60 个本垒打还差着十万八千里。人们认为他十分讨厌，是那种从不接受采访也不喜欢孩子的人。在那场破纪录大战中，球迷和记者都坚决站在曼托一边 —— 不过我喜欢马里斯。

最终，即使受到膝伤困扰的曼托拼尽全力，也只是打出 54 个本垒打。马里斯凭借 61 个本垒打打破了鲁斯的纪录。在鲁斯的整个职业生涯中，他曾有 4 次在一个赛季中击出 50 个或更多的本垒打，并 12 次摘得联赛本垒打的桂冠。而在创造了新纪录之后，马里斯再也没能击出 50 个或哪怕 40 个本垒打，也没有在联赛中独占鳌头。这样的总体表现无疑是在给愤愤不平的公众情绪火上浇油。后来的日子里，马里斯不断遭到球迷、体育评论员以及其他球员的无情批评。他们的判决是：成为冠军的压力把他彻底压垮了。一位著名的棒球老前辈说道：「马里斯不配打破鲁斯的纪录。」这句话也许是真的，但原因并非这位老前辈想的那样。

多年以后，受到那门数学课的影响，我开始学着从另一个角度考虑马里斯的成就。为了分析这场「马里斯 - 曼托竞赛」，我重新阅读了《生活》的那篇旧文，并发现文中简短地讨论了概率论，以及如何用概率论预测竞赛结果。我决定自己建一个本垒打的数学模型，即任何一次击球（也就是通往胜利路上的一次机会），其结果当然主要取决于球员本身的能力，但它同样依赖于许多其他因素的相互作用：球员的健康状况、风、太阳或球场灯光、投球的质量、比赛形势、是否正确猜出了投手投球的方式、挥棒时手眼是否协调、是否因为在酒吧遇到了那位浅黑皮肤的姑娘而睡得太晚，或是有没有被早餐吃的辣奶酪热狗和蒜香薯条弄坏肚子，等等。如果没有这些不可预测的因素，球员要么每次都打出本垒打，要么每次都打不出。实际上，对于每次击球，我们只能说这名球员有一个确定的概率击出本垒打，也有一个确定的概率不能击出本垒打。球员每年获得的数百次击球机会，通常都被随机因素的影响通过平均消除了，最终得到的是某个典型的本垒打数量，它随着球员技术的提高而增加，并不可避免地因为那个在英俊面庞上刻出皱纹的过程的影响而下降。但有时这些随机因素并没有被完全平均。这种情况发生得有多频繁呢？它造成的偏差又有多大呢？

根据球员每年的统计数据，我们可以估算他在每次走到本垒 前准备击球时，能够打出本垒打的概率。1960 年，也就是马里斯破纪录那一年的前一年，他每 14.7 次击球能击出 1 记本垒打（与他表现最好的 4 年中的总平均值差不多）。让我们称这个水平为「正常马里斯」。我们用下面的方法来建立正常马里斯的本垒打模型：设想有一枚硬币，平均每抛出 14.7 次（而不是 2 次），就有 1 次正面朝上。当马里斯每次上垒击球时，扔一下这枚硬币，如果扔出正面朝上，就给他记上一次本垒打。如果用这种方式来让马里斯完成 1961 赛季的比赛，那么只要对该赛季中马里斯所获得的每个击球机会都扔一下这枚硬币，我们就能得到一大堆五花八门的「1961 赛季」。在这些「赛季」中，马里斯的技术水平都是「正常马里斯」的水平，而这些模拟赛季的结果，就能说明当技术没有突然提高时，「正常马里斯」在 1961 年能期望获得的成绩范围，就是他的「正常」本垒打能力，再加上纯粹运气的因素所能达到的成绩范围。

如果想要实实在在地完成这项实验，那么我不但要有一枚稀奇古怪的硬币，一个能撑得住那么多次扔硬币的强壮腕部，还得有一段时间能够暂时离开大学里的工作岗位。不过，利用随机性的数学理论，我只需要利用方程与计算机就可以完成这个分析。在许多虚拟的 1961 赛季中，正常马里斯的本垒打数量并不令人吃惊地落在了一个对他而言正常的范围内，在某些模拟赛季中他打中得多一点儿，在某些模拟赛季中打中得少一点儿，而在一个赛季中打中了比正常数量多得多或少得多的本垒打的情况则很罕见。那么，以马里斯的天赋获得鲁斯式的结果，这样的情况有多常见呢？

我原本以为马里斯追上鲁斯纪录的可能性，大概跟杰克·惠特克那次中彩票的机会差不多：惠特克几年前在便利店买早餐饼干时，花了 1 美元买了张全美「强力球」彩票，最终赢得了 3.14 亿美元。对于一个天分更差点儿的球员而言，追上鲁斯纪录的机会跟这差不多，马里斯尽管没有鲁斯的天赋，但其本垒打的水平仍然比平均水平高出许多。因此，仅靠运气就能创造新纪录的机会对马里斯而言，绝非可以忽略不计的概率：差不多每 32 个赛季，他就能有一个赛季追平或打破鲁斯的纪录。这个概率听起来似乎不是很高，估计也没有人会根据这个概率，在 1961 年这个特定的年份，在马里斯这个特定的人身上投注，来赌他会破纪录。但由这个概率还能得出更为惊人的结论。为什么这样说呢？现在让我们问一个更有趣的问题：假设所有的球员都具有正常马里斯的天分，让我们再来考察一下，从鲁斯创造纪录到「类固醇时代」（在那个时代，由于药物的使用，本垒打与以前相比变得很寻常）开始时的所有 72 年的时间。在这个时期内，仅靠运气，某个球员在某个时候追平或打破鲁斯的纪录，这种可能性有多大呢？相信马里斯仅仅只是凑巧成为那个特殊赛季的幸运儿的观点，是否真的合理呢？

分析表明，在这段时期内，大概每 3 年就有一名球员兼具与 1961 年的正常马里斯差不多的天赋和运气。总的来说，仅依靠运气，这些球员中的某一个能够追平或打破鲁斯纪录的可能性，要比 50% 多一点儿。换句话说，在 70 年的时间里，一名实力更接近 40 个本垒打的球员打出一个 60 个或更多本垒打的随机峰值，这种情况发生的可能性超过了 50%—— 这个随机峰值有点儿像我们在通过糟糕的线路通话时，在背景杂音中不时听到的很大的噼啪声。而同样可以期待的是，不管那个破纪录的「幸运儿」是谁，人们仍然会一如既往地神化或者贬低他，当然也会一如既往无穷无尽地分析他。

我们永远不能准确地知道，相较于其职业棒球生涯中的其他时间，1961 年的马里斯是一个水平好得多的球员，还是个仅仅受到幸运女神垂青的人。但古尔德或诺贝尔自然科学奖获得者珀塞尔等卓越的科学家对棒球和其他体育项目进行的细致分析表明，我描述的那个扔硬币模型与球员和球队的真实表现很吻合，包括他们的巅峰与低谷。

因此，当我们再看到体育或其他领域的辉煌成就时，我们应该记住，非凡的成就不一定有非凡的原因。随机事件常常看似并非随机，但在解释这个林林总总的世界时，我们千万不要混淆这两者。在耗费了许多世纪的努力之后，科学家终于学会如何透过表面的秩序，去发现隐藏在自然界和日常生活的面纱之下的随机性。在这一章，我们不过对随机性运作方式投以匆匆数瞥。在下面的章节中，我将结合随机性的历史发展考察随机性的核心思想，并说明这些思想与我们的目标的关联性。我们的目标，是希望为你提供一个观察我们周遭世界的新视角，让你能够更好地理解随机性这一自然界的基本特征与我们自身体验的联系。