# 2021001PaperRS01.md

## 记忆时间

## 卡片

## 汇总

2021005Implementing-Smart-Factory-of-Industrie-4.0-An-Outlook.md

2021006Smart-Factory-of-Industry-4.0-Key-Technologies-Application-Case-and-Challenges.md

2021007SmartFactory-Towards-a-factory-of-things.md

2021008Smart-Factory-A-Step-towards-the-Next-Generation-of-Manufacturing.md

## 2021005Implementing-Smart-Factory-of-Industrie-4.0-An-Outlook.md

### Abstract

With the application of Internet of Things and services to manufacturing, the fourth stage of industrialization, referred to as Industrie 4.0, is believed to be approaching. For Industrie 4.0 to come true, it is essential to implement the horizontal integration of inter-corporation value network, the end-to-end integration of engineering value chain, and the vertical integration of factory inside.

In this paper, we focus on the vertical integration to implement flexible and reconfigurable smart factory. We first propose a brief framework that incorporates industrial wireless networks, cloud, and fixed or mobile terminals with smart artifacts such as machines, products, and conveyors. Then, we elaborate the operational mechanism from the perspective of control engineering, that is, the smart artifacts form a self-organized system which is assisted with the feedback and coordination blocks that are implemented on the cloud and based on the big data analytics. In addition, we outline the main technical features and beneficial outcomes and present a detailed design scheme. We conclude that the smart factory of Industrie 4.0 is achievable by extensively applying the existing enabling technologies while actively coping with the technical challenges.

### 01. Introduction

Recently, the emerging technologies (e.g., Internet of Things (IoT) [1–3], wireless sensor networks [4, 5], big data [6], cloud computing [7–9], embedded system [10], and mobile Internet [11]) are being introduced into the manufacturing environment, which ushers in a fourth industrial revolution. Consequently, a strategic initiative called「Industrie 4.0」was proposed and was adopted as part of the「High-Tech Strategy 2020 Action Plan」of the German government [12]. The similar strategies were also proposed by other main industrial countries, for example,「Industrial Internet」[13] from USA and「Internet +」[14] from China. The Industrie 4.0 describes a production oriented Cyber-Physical Systems (CPS) [1517] that integrate production facilities, warehousing systems, logistics, and even social requirements to establish the global value creation networks [18].

1『智能工厂设计到的技术：物联网、无限传感器、大数据、云计算、嵌入式系统、移动网络。打造一个网络系统，其集成了生产系统、仓储系统、物料系统和客户需求系统。（2021-01-27）』

In order to preferably implement Industrie 4.0, the following three key features should be considered [12]: 1) horizontal integration through value networks, 2) vertical integration and networked manufacturing systems, and 3) end-to-end digital integration of engineering across the entire value chain. The setting for vertical integration is the factory, so the vertical integration means implementing the smart factory that is highly flexible and reconfigurable. Therefore, the smart factory is believed to be able to produce customized and small-lot products efficiently and profitably.

1『这里谈到智慧工厂的 3 个关键特征：1）价值网的横向集成。2）制造网络和纵向集成。3）贯穿于整个价值链的端到端工程数据集成。2.2 小结里有更详细的阐述。（2021-01-27）』

Prior to the smart manufacturing of Indusrie 4.0, many other advanced manufacturing schemes have already been proposed to overcome the drawbacks of the traditional production lines, for example, the flexible manufacturing and the agile manufacturing. Among these schemes, the multiagent system (MAS) is the most representative [19]. The manufacturing resources are defined as intelligent agents that negotiate with each other to implement dynamical reconfiguration to achieve flexibility. However, it is difficult for the MAS to handle the complexity of manufacturing system, so it still lacks a generally accepted MAS implementation. In our view, the cloud-assisted industrial wireless network (IWN) can suitably support the smart factory by implementing IoT and services [20, 21]. By this means, the smart artifacts can communicate and negotiate with each other through the IWN to implement self-organization, and the massive data can be uploaded to and processed by the cloud that has scalable storage space and powerful computing ability to implement system-wide coordination.

In this article, we mainly focus on constructing a general architecture of the smart factory and exploring the operational mechanism that organizes the involved technical components. The contributions of our work mainly include five aspects. 

First, we propose a smart factory framework to integrate the IWN, cloud, and terminals with the smart shop floor devices such as machines, products, products, and conveyors. 

Second, we propose a macro closed-loop model that describes the operational mechanism of the architecture, that is, the smart shop floor artifacts form a self-organized system, and the big data analytics provides global feedback and coordination. 

Third, we outline the technical features and beneficial outcomes of the smart factory. 

Fourth, we present a prototype design of our smart factory using the existing technologies. 

Finally, we discuss the main technical challenges and suggest the possible solutions.

The rest of this article is organized as follows. In Section 2, the main features of Industrie 4.0 and its enabling technologies are further discussed. In Section 3, we propose the framework and operational mechanism of the smart factory and outline the main technical features and beneficial outcomes. Then, we introduce the detailed design scheme of our application demonstration in Section 4. In Section 5, the technical challenges and possible solutions about implementing the smart factory are presented. Finally, the conclusions and future work are given in Section 6.

### 02. Philosophy of Industrie 4.0

The term Industrie 4.0 means the fourth industrial revolution. It incorporates emerging technical advancement to improve industry so as to deal with some global challenges. In this section, we present the related background, the main features, and the enabling technologies to form a base for our smart factory development.

#### 2.1. Background and Purpose

The human society desires a progressive improvement of life quality. The industry has been advancing to keep pace with this kind of requirements. By now, it has experienced three revolutionary stages, that is, three industrial revolutions. The industry can continue to improve people’s living standard by providing customized and high-quality products to consumers and setting up a better work environment for employees.

However, the current production paradigm is not sustainable [22]. On one hand, the industrial production contributes to much of the environmental disruption, such as global climate warming and environmental pollution. On the other hand, it consumes huge plenty of nonrenewable resources, such as petroleum and coal. In addition, the industry suffers an ever shrinking workforce supply because of population aging.

Therefore, the industry needs a radical change and it is the Industrie 4.0 that addresses this change. The core idea of Industrie 4.0 is to use the emerging information technologies to implement IoT and services so that business process and engineering process are deeply integrated making production operate in a flexible, efficient, and green way with constantly high quality and low cost.

1-2『这里对工业 4.0 下了个定义。做一张术语卡片。（2020-01-27）』——已完成

#### 2.2. Three Kinds of Integration

Figure 1: Illustration of three kinds of integration and their relationship.

As we know, the main features of Industrie 4.0 include: 1) horizontal integration through value networks to facilitate inter-corporation collaboration, 2) vertical integration of hierarchical subsystems inside a factory to create flexible and reconfigurable manufacturing system, and 3) end-to-end engineering integration across the entire value chain to support product customization. 

Figure 1 depicts the relationship of the three kinds of integration. The horizontal integration of corporations and the vertical integration of factory inside are two bases for the end-to-end integration of engineering process. This is because the product lifecycle comprises several stages that should be performed by different corporations.

Horizontal Integration. One corporation should both compete and cooperate with many other related corporations. By the inter-corporation horizontal integration, related corporations can form an efficient ecosystem. Information, finance, and material can flow fluently among these corporations. Therefore, new value networks as well as business models may emerge.

Vertical Integration. A factory owns several physical and informational subsystems, such as actuator and sensor, control, production management, manufacturing, and corporate planning. It is essential to vertical integration of actuator and sensor signals across different levels right up to the enterprise resource planning (ERP) level to enable a flexible and reconfigurable manufacturing system. By this integration, the smart machines form a self-organized system that can be dynamically reconfigured to adapt to different product types; and the massive information is collected and processed to make the production process transparent.

1『这里的几个关键词：自组织、实时、生产透明。（2021-01-27）』

End-To-End Engineering Integration. In a product-centric value creation process, a chain of activities is involved, such as customer requirement expression, product design and development, production planning, production engineering, production, services, maintenance, and recycle. By integration, a continuous and consistent product model can be reused by every stage. The effect of product design on production and service can be foreseen using the powerful software tool chain so that the customized products are enabled.

1『这里的几个关键词：定制化是结果。（2021-01-27）』

#### 2.3. Needed Technologies

Some emerging information technologies, such as IoT, big data, and cloud computing as well as artificial intelligence (AI) technologies (e.g., MAS) are enabling factors of Industrie 4.0. Integrating these technologies with industrial automation, business, and trade is able to achieve a huge improvement of industry. With powerful microprocessors and AI technologies, the products and machines become smart in the sense that they not only have abilities of computing, communication, and control (3C) but also have autonomy and sociality. With the support of industrial networks, these smart artifacts are interconnected with each other and with the Internet. With the cloud computing technology, the server network can be virtualized as a resource pool that can provide scalable computing ability and storage space on demand for big data analytics. With numerous information systems deployed on cloud and smart things connected to the same cloud, a novel world of IoT and services is created.

2『 3C 做一张术语卡片。（2021-01-28）』——已完成

The IoT and services lays a solid foundation for the three kinds of integration. For example, a network of smart artifacts can reconfigure itself dynamically and provide massive data to the information systems on the cloud. This is actually vertical integration. With data model and powerful software tools deployed on the cloud, the end-to-end integration can also be implemented. The new electronic commerce such as online-to-offline (O2O) starts a new business model which is an example of horizontal integration.

In summary, the Industrie 4.0 aims to cope with personalized needs and global challenges so as to gain competitive strength considering the globalization of markets. To this end, the emerging information technologies should be applied to every aspect of industry to implement three kinds of integration. Then, high-quality and customized products can be available with improved resource efficiency, productivity, and low cost. The Industrie 4.0 is believed to impose a deep effect that is not limited to industry itself but also to lifestyle and the way we work [23].

### 03. Smart Factory Underpinned by IWN and Cloud

The factory is responsible for actually processing raw materials and semifinished products to produce finished products. Within the boundary of a factory, various physical or informational subsystems are involved during production and management. These subsystems are present at different hierarchical levels, for example, the actuator and sensor, control, production management, manufacturing and execution, and corporate planning levels. At present, the information flow is often blocked between subsystems and the continuity and consistency are generally difficult to be guaranteed; and the material flow is along the fixed production lines that lack flexibility.

Therefore, the Industrie 4.0 expects to vertically integrate the hierarchical subsystems to transfer the traditional factory into the highly flexible and reconfigurable manufacturing system, that is, to implement the smart factory. This is essential to support small-lot and customized consumer demands. The smart factory is also a key base to support the other two kinds of integration, that is, the horizontal integration through value networks and the end-to-end digital integration of engineering. In this section, we present a detailed conceptual design of smart factory by constructing a framework, exploring its operational mechanism and concluding its technical features and beneficial outcomes.

#### 3.1. System Architecture

Figure 2: A brief framework of the smart factory of Industrie 4.0.

Figure 2 depicts a smart factory framework consisting of four tangible layers, namely, physical resource layer, industrial network layer, cloud layer, and supervision and control terminal layer. The physical resources are implemented as smart things which can communicate with each other through the industrial network. Various information systems (e.g., ERP) exist in the cloud which can collect massive data from the physical resource layer and interact with people through the terminals [24]. Thus, the tangible framework enables a networked world for intangible information to flow freely. This actually forms a CPS where physical artifacts and informational entities are deeply integrated.

Physical Resource Layer. It comprises various kinds of physical artifacts such as smart products, smart machines, smart products, and smart conveyors. These smart artifacts can communicate with each other through the industrial network; and beyond this, they are able to collaborate for achieving a system-wide goal; for example, a group of machines (generally, a subset of available ones) are determined through negotiation to process the sequence of operations required by a product. Thus, the physical artifacts form a self-organized and autonomous manufacturing system based on industrial network and intelligent negotiation mechanism.

Industrial Network Layer. It forms a kind of important infrastructure that not only enables inter-artifact communication but also connects the physical resource layer with the cloud layer. The IWN is superior to the wired network such as industrial Ethernet considering the volatile characteristics of the smart factory caused by, for example, the newly added machines or machine malfunction and the mobile entities such as automated guided vehicles (AGVs) and products. The IWN can accommodate these variations more easily because it can provide more flexible and convenient wireless links. Therefore, the IWN is believed to be mandatory for smart factory.

Cloud Layer. It is another kind of important infrastructure that supports the smart factory. The term cloud is a vivid expression for a network of servers that provides layered services in the form of Infrastructure-as-aService (IaaS), Platform-as-a-Service (PaaS), and Software-as-a-Service (SaaS). With the cloud computing technology, even the Internet can be virtualized as a huge resource pool. Therefore, the cloud provides a very elastic solution for big data application in the sense that both the storage space and computing ability can be scaled on demand. When operated, the smart artifacts may produce massive data, which can be transferred to the cloud through the IWN for information systems to process. The big data analytics then can support system management and optimization including supervision and control.

Supervision and Control Terminal Layer. It links people to the smart factory. With the terminals such as PCs, tablets, and mobile phones, people can access the statistics provided by the cloud, apply a different configuration, or perform maintenance and diagnosis, even remotely through the Internet.

#### 3.2. Operational Mechanisms

Figure 3: Operational mechanism of the smart factory of Industrie 4.0.

From the perspective of control engineer, the smart factory can be viewed as a closedloop system, as shown in Figure 3. In the center of the control loop is the network of smart artifacts. The smart artifact has 3C capabilities, and beyond this, it has autonomy and sociality. By autonomy, we mean that the smart artifact makes decisions by itself; no other entities can directly control its behavior. By sociality, we mean that the smart artifacts understand a common set of knowledge and follow a common set of rules for negotiation. Therefore, a society of smart artifacts can yield a highly flexible manufacturing system, that is, a self-organized and reconfigurable system that seems to be humanoid or smart.

1『这里感觉出现了核心的观点，autonomy and sociality，做一张主题卡片。（2021-01-27）』——已完成

Through collaboration, the smart artifacts try to align their behaviors to approach a system-wide goal; but the system performance is generally not optimal. This is because the smart artifacts are myopic that they make decisions based on local information. As to manufacturing, load may not be balanced, efficiency may not be the highest, and deadlocks may occur. The big data analytics block in the feedback channel that lies in the cloud serves to solve this problem. The smart machines communicate their state and process information to the block, and the distributed sensors transfer their sensed data to the block as well. Therefore, the global state of the system can be extracted from the massive realtime system information. Based on the powerful computing ability, the block processes this big data in time to serve two purposes: 1) coordinate the behaviors of the distributed smart artifacts and 2) feedback performance indictors to the self-organized network. By this global optimization, the smart artifacts are affected so that higher performance can be expected.

#### 3.3. Technical Features

Figure 4: Illustration of the traditional production line and smart factory production system.

Figure 4 illustrates the difference between the traditional production line and the smart factory production system. The traditional production line aims to produce the single type of products. It generally consists of several machines and a conveyor belt. The conveyor belt is not closed; that is, one end serves as the input and the other end serves as the output, and the machines are deployed along the line. When the unfinished products flow through the line from the input to the output, each machine performs its predetermined part of task. Generally, no redundant machines exist, and the conveyor belt is carefully tailored. The machine has its own independent controller, but the communication between machines is seldom. By contrast, the smart factory production system aims to process multiple types of products. Thus, from the view of the single product type, the machines are redundant. The machines relay on negotiation to reconfigure themselves to adapt to product type variation. The conveyor belt should be closed to support various production routes, so there is not definite input or output.

1『这里 get 到了精髓。1）传统工厂「the machines are deployed along the line」，可以理解为设备是在一条固定的合成路线（流程）上的，智能工厂可以实时调整路线。单个线路上核心设备出现故障，整个生产线就得停，智慧工厂的话就换着走另外一条线。2）可以切换生产不同的产品，类似于多功能车间。2）传统工厂，单个设备、单个单元操作组联锁控制，智慧工厂设备全部联网，共享一个大脑云。（2021-01-27）』

These fundamental differences deliver some key features for the smart factory. We outline these features in Table 1 by comparing with that of traditional factory.

TABLE 1: Technical features of smart factory compared with the traditional factory

| Number | Smart factory production system | Traditional production line |
| --- | --- | --- |
| 1 | Diverse Resources. To produce multiple types of small-lot products, more resources of different types should be able to coexist in the system. | Limited and Predetermined Resources. To build a fixed line for mass production of a special product type, the needed resources are carefully calculated, tailored, and configured to minimize resource redundancy. |
| 2 | Dynamic Routing. When switching between different types of products, the needed resources and the route to link these resources should be reconfigured automatically and on line. | Fixed Routing. The production line is fixed unless manually reconfigured by people with system power down. |
| 3 | Comprehensive Connections. The machines, products, information systems, and people are connected and interact with each other through the high speed network infrastructure. | Shop Floor Control Network. The field buses may be used to connect the controller with its slave stations. But communication among machines is not necessary. |
| 4 | Deep Convergence. The smart factory operates in a networked environment where the IWN and the cloud integrate all the physical artifacts and information systems to form the IoT and services. | Separated Layer. The field devices are separated from the upper information systems. |
| 5 | Self-Organization. The control function distributes to multiple entities. These smart entities negotiate with each other to organize themselves to cope with system dynamics. | Independent Control. Every machine is preprogrammed to perform the assigned functions. Any malfunction of single device will break the full line. |
| 6 | Big Data. The smart artifacts can produce massive data, the high bandwidth network can transfer them, and the cloud can process the big data. | Isolated Information. The machine may record its own process information. But this information is seldom used by others. |

On the other hand, the proposed smart factory production system also has obvious differences with the MAS scheme in the sense that the MAS scheme does not involve cloud and big data. Thus, the MAS scheme is not able to benefit from the big data based feedback and coordination. In addition, the big data enables smart artifacts to form an autonomous architecture, while the existing MAS schemes are generally characterized by hierarchical or mediator architectures. Therefore, the smart factory of Industrie 4.0 assists the self-organized systems such as MAS with the cloud and big data technologies to combine the advantages of the selforganization and central control.

#### 3.4. Beneficial Outcomes

The advanced technical features suggest that the smart factory exhibits an attractive and promising production paradigm. It leads to many beneficial outcomes which can cope with the global challenges in the sense that the customized products can be produced effectively, efficiently, and profitably. We discuss some possible merits that the whole society can benefit from. These benefits are also guiding the effort to promote the implementation of the smart factory.

Flexibility. The smart artifacts can be reconfigured automatically to produce multiple types of products. Even new products can be directly ordered to the system. This helps to cope with ever changing market and discerning consumption demands. The self-organization and dynamic reconfiguration also bring robustness in the sense that new machines can join the system in a plug and play way; and the malfunction machines will not affect the system due to the machine redundancy.

Productivity. Compared with the traditional production line, the smart factory can produce small-lot products of different types more efficiently. On one hand, the setup time is minimized when switching between different types of products. On the other hand, as the production process is optimized with the help of big data feedback and coordination, the average manufacturing routes are shrunk and the utilization rate of machines and other resources is improved.

Resource and Energy Efficiency. Based on the big data analytics, we can establish an accurate knowledge of production process and guarantee system with a stable product quality level and the rate of finished products. Thus, the needed raw materials can be determined before production and product redundancy can be minimized. In addition, smart machines operate in more intelligent way that the energy consumption can be reduced consequently. The measures include saving energy during breaks and using more new technologies such as speed-controlled motors.

Transparency. The big data provides real-time, complete, and effective information on every aspect of the smart factory [25, 26]. Based on the big data analytics, we can quantify performance indicators related to machines, products, and system. This enables us to make accurate and effective decisions more quickly. This can also facilitate production plan and accelerate response to market inquiry. When the production ability of the smart factory cannot satisfy a certain product order, the questions about how to improve the system can also be easily answered.

Promoting Integration. The vertical integration of hierarchical subsystems leads to smart factory, which in turn supports horizontal integration through value networks and end-to-end digital integration of engineering. Thus, the smart factory lays a solid foundation for more extensive integration and collaboration, that is, the implementation of Industrie 4.0. Based on this global collaboration network, the consumers, design activities, manufacturing, and logistics can interact above the cloud. This will deliver a sustainable production paradigm, which also has a profound impact on life style, culture, and social organization.

Profitable. We consider the initial investment cost first and then the operational cost. The additional investment mainly refers to the IWN, cloud, and new information systems compared with the traditional production lines. Based on the Moore’s law, the cost of information technologies will constantly decline while the performance constantly improves. For the coming small-lot and customized consummation demands, the operational cost is rather low compared with the fixed production line because of flexibility and resource and energy efficiency. It is pointed out that even one-off items can be produced profitably with the smart factory.

Friendly to Staff. The machines operate automatically by themselves so that no workers need to perform routine tasks. With the assistance of big data analytics, powerful software tools, and more friendly and flexible interface measures, maintenance and diagnosis become much easier. Even people all over the world can work together to perform remote repair work, as the people and machines can interact with each other through the cloud.

### 04. Application Demonstration

Figure 5: Illustration of the flexible conveying system of the smart factory.

The smart factory is a particular implementation of CPS that is based on the extensive and deep application of information technologies to manufacturing. As the needed technologies at least have some preliminary version, some pilot smart factory applications have already been established. This is an important step to promote Industrie 4.0. The key problems can be identified during the integration process, and the benefits can be demonstrated to the society.

At the smart factory prototype of「German Research Centre for Artificial Intelligence (DFKI)」in Kaiserslautern, chemicals giant BASF SE produces fully customized shampoos and liquid soaps [27]. As a test order is placed online, the empty soap bottle that is attached with the radio frequency identification (RFID) tag communicates to production machines what kind of soap, fragrance, bottle cap color, and labeling it requires. Each bottle has the potential to be entirely different from the one next to it on the conveyor belt. The experiment relies on a wireless network through which the machines and products do all the talking, with the only human input coming from the person placing the sample order.

Now, we are developing our smart factory prototype. The main configurations are described as follows.

Raw Products with RFID Tags. The raw products that will be processed by the smart factory are pasted with readable and writeable RFID tags. Before entering the system, the raw product has its attached RFID tag written with process requirements. This information helps to organize machines and configure production route. The content of RFID tag is kept updated during production. The carrier of the product that is equipped with a RFID reader interacts with the product. The carrier then represents the product to communicate with machines.

Robotic Machines. We use a number of 10 six-joint serial robots for loading and unloading operation plus a number of 20 Cartesian robots for machining and testing. The serial robots are from Japanese DENSO corp. with the model VS6577G, and the Cartesian robots are from Chinese Bangkang corp. One serial robot serves two Cartesian robots. The Cartesian robots can be equipped with different manipulators to serve different functions. The serial robots fetch products from conveying system and put the products onto the fixtures of the Cartesian robots and vice versa. The fetching positions of products for the serial robots are marked with sensors. Machine vision technology is also used to position the products.

Conveying System. We are designing and developing a railway like conveying system. A kind of two-meter long linear module and a kind of right-angle arc module are used to assemble multiple interconnected cyclic tracks. Each module has its own smart controller. The AGVs run along these tracks. Each AGV can control its position and velocity independently and prevents collision with the assistance of tracks. The AGV is equipped with a RFID reader so it can read or write to the products’ RFID tags. The AGVs can also communicate with machines on behalf of the products. We illustrate a possible configuration in Figure 5, where there is a storage segment connected to the tracks for recycling the empty AGVs (represented as the green circles).

1『有点明白图 5 表达的意思了，分支岔路的轨道当作缓存区域。（2021-01-27）』

IWN. We use wireless products from Taiwan MOXA corp. to set up our IWN. This includes AWK-1121 series industrial IEEE 802.11a/b/g wireless clients and NPort W2150A 1-port RS-232/422/485 IEEE 802.11a/b/g wireless device servers. The wireless clients are installed to machines and AGVs, and the servers are distributed uniformly over the conveying system.

Private Cloud. We set up a private cloud with five NF5270 M3 servers from Chinese Inspur Corp. With cloud computing software, the network of servers is virtualized as a super computer for our smart factory platform. Compared with the public cloud solution, the private cloud scheme enables us first-hand experience about cloud computing and big data analytics. We expect this experience to provide us with practical requirements when shifting to the public cloud service.

Large Screen and Small Terminals. We construct a one-meter wide and three-meter long liquid crystal display (LCD) for displaying various kinds of information such as big data analysis results and the virtual reality (VR) model of the smart manufacturing platform. Both iOS and Android based smart phones and Windows or UNIX based PCs can be connected to the cloud through Wi-Fi access points. These mobile and fixed terminals are for supervision and control purpose.

### 05. Technical Challenges and Solutions

We need smart hardware and software to construct the smart factories. These include smart machine controllers, high bandwidth IWN devices, manufacturing related big data analytics software, and the integrated information systems. But prior to the off-the-shelf products, the underlying technical issues should be investigated. Based on the theoretical analysis and development experiences, we identify several challenges and give possible solutions in this section.

#### 5.1. Intelligent Decision-Making and Negotiation Mechanism

The smart artifacts are fundamental components of smart factory. While today’s computer numerical control (CNC) machines generally have 3C capabilities, the smart machines should have additional autonomy and sociality capabilities. This means the smart machines can make decisions by themselves instead of being directly instructed, and they can negotiate with each other and with the smart products. Therefore, the autonomy and sociality capabilities are the key enablers for the implementation of a self-organized manufacturing system. The research on MAS that is a branch of AI technology can provide some useful results such as the ontology method and the contract net protocol (CNP) [28]. However, further research is still needed to achieve the autonomous manufacturing system architecture instead of hierarchical or mediator ones.

2『上面的信息补充进主题卡片「智慧工厂的 autonomy and sociality」里。（2021-01-28）』

#### 5.2. High Speed IWN Protocols

The IWN is superior to wired network in a manufacturing environment; but the existing IWN standards such as WIA-PA [29] and WirelessHART [30] cannot provide enough bandwidth for heavy communication and high-volume data transfer. The standards such as IEEE 802.11 [31, 32] can provide high bandwidth but not specially designed for industrial applications. The IWN used in automation is different from the ad hoc wireless sensor network (WSN) used in surveillance domains [33, 34]. The QoS other than energy efficiency is more concerned. Maybe the hybrid solution that wireless gateways are wired to form a backbone mesh network is a practical implementation at present.

1『现在 5G 可以满足这个需求了。（2021-01-28）』

#### 5.3. Manufacturing Specific Big Data and Its Analytics

Big data will deliver big value in the future. The utilization of big data is now feasible with the cloud computing that enables a scalable storage and computing ability. Despite the cloud computing and general big data analytics, we should focus on special features of manufacturing related big data. Questions on which data should be collected, how these data can be collected, how to formulate, what is the meaning and how to analyze should be answered.

Instead of collecting various data and then struggling to think how to use them, the practical beginning may be considering which information can reveal quality and efficiency related factors. For example, as the malfunction machines will reduce product quality and the finished product ratio, the machine state and its operation history should be monitored and analyzed to predict problems so that people can respond in advance. To improve efficiency, we should know the time taken in processing each operation and operation time of each machine. This helps to recognize the performance bottleneck of operations and load unbalance of machines.

#### 5.4. System Modeling and Analysis

By the general selforganized theory, the self-organized process may lead to unexpected situations such as chaos [35]. Thus, we need to model self-organized manufacturing system, deduce its dynamical equations, and conclude appropriate control methods. However, the theories on self-organized system are not matured and the complex system research is still a hot topic. The formal methods such as model checking technology may be possible option for modeling and analyzing selforganized manufacturing system [36].

#### 5.5. Cyber and Property Security

We cannot place too much emphasis on security aspects. Without security, we dare not bring our smart factories into service. The smart factory suffers bigger security problems than traditional Internet applications [37, 38]. On one hand, we should protect various information on customers, suppliers, commercial strategies, and know-hows. These kinds of information are generally stored in the public cloud instead of enterprises’ private data center. These confidential materials may be disclosed, for example, by hackers, which may cause huge profit loss or even legal disputes. On the other hand, the machines and other physical objects and even people themselves are connected to the cloud. When control mechanism is broken, these objects may operate in a destructive way to cause direct property loss.

Encryption and authorization are generally used in cyber security domain, which will be still useful in smart factory or Industrie 4.0 applications; but these mechanisms are not enough. By now, we do not have a way to create an absolute software system. Even the very famous software is suffering endless loopholes [39]. New mechanisms which are specially designed for smart factory should be developed; and before these come true, some conservative methods may be practical options. For example, the critical information is stored in enterprises' private cloud and the unsafe operation instructions are reported to people rather than being immediately executed.

1『目前能想到的保护措施：1）关键信息存储在企业的私有云上。2）不安全的操作指令不允许直接执行，必须经过人确认。（2021-01-28）』

#### 5.6. Modularized and Flexible Physical Artifacts

When processing a product, distributed decision-making organizes a group of resources together. These resources include equipment for machining or testing and that for conveying. Thus, it is required that these physical artifacts should be able to work together. First of all, the conveying system should be able to transfer products between any two machines. Secondly, functions for automatic positioning, clamping, and programming should be integrated into the system. Therefore, we should develop modularized and smart conveying units that can dynamically reconfigure production routes. The modularized and standalone positioning and clamping units, with smart controllers should also be developed to easily incorporate new machines to the system.

### 06. Conclusions and Future Work

With the emerging information technologies, such as IoT, big data, and cloud computing together with artificial intelligence technologies, we believe the smart factory of Industrie 4.0 can be implemented. The smart machines and products can communicate and negotiate with each other to reconfigure themselves for flexible production of multiple types of products. The massive data can be collected from smart artifacts and transferred to the cloud through the IWN. This enables the system-wide feedback and coordination based on big data analytics to optimize system performance. The above self-organized reconfiguration and big data based feedback and coordination define the framework and operational mechanism of the smart factory.

The smart factory helps to implement the sustainable production mode to cope with the global challenges. It can lead to novel business modes and even affect our lifestyle. Although the implementation of smart factory is still facing some technical challenges, we are walking on the right path by simultaneously applying the existing technologies and promoting technical advancements. With the existing technologies, some application demonstrations have already been built. Therefore, the smart factory and the Industrie 4.0 can be implemented in a progressive way, along with the unstopped technical advancements. In the future, we will continue to develop our prototype design and focus on the key enabling technologies.

### References

1-2『参考文献超级值得深挖。（2021-01-28）』——未完成

## 2021006Smart-Factory-of-Industry-4.0-Key-Technologies-Application-Case-and-Challenges.md

最新版发表于 2018-03

### Abstract

Due to the current structure of digital factory, it is necessary to build the smart factory to upgrade the manufacturing industry. Smart factory adopts the combination of physical technology and cyber technology and deeply integrates previously independent discrete systems making the involved technologies more complex and precise than they are now. In this paper, a hierarchical architecture of the smart factory was proposed ﬁrst, and then the key technologies were analyzed from the aspects of the physical resource layer, the network layer, and the data application layer. In addition, we discussed the major issues and potential solutions to key emerging technologies, such as Internet of Things (IoT), big data, and cloud computing, which are embedded in the manufacturing process. Finally, a candy packing line was used to verify the key technologies of smart factory, which showed that the overall equipment effectiveness of the equipment is signiﬁcantly improved.

Key Works: Smart factory, big data, cloud computing, cyber-physical systems, industrial Internet of Things.

### 01. Introduction

With the rapid development of electric and electronic technology, information technology and advanced manufacturing technology, the production mode of manufacturing enterprises is being transferred from digital to intelligent. The new era that combines virtual reality technology based on the Cyber-Physical System (CPS) is coming [1]–[4]. Due to the new challenges, the advantages of traditional manufacturing industries have been gradually diminished. Consequently, the intelligent manufacturing technology is one of high technology areas where industrialized countries highly pay more attention to. Europe 2020 strategy [5], Industry 4.0 strategy [6] and China manufacturing 2025 [7] have been proposed. United States has gradually accelerated the speed of reindustrialization and manufacturing reﬂow [8]. The transformation of intelligent manufacturing intrigued the profound and lasting effect on the future manufacturing worldwide.

In the context of intelligent manufacturing, it is important to establish the smart factory to achieve advanced manufacturing based on network technologies and manufacturing data. In addition, the implementation of smart factory should take into account the status quo and manufacturing requirements. Due to the different characteristics of manufacturing ﬁeld and information ﬁeld, there are still many technical problems to be solved in order to accelerate the path of smart factory. The main goals of this paper are summarized as follows:

1 In the physical resources layer, physical equipment needs to have support for real-time information acquisition, and communication devices should provide a high-speed transmission of heterogeneous information. The workshop should ensure fast reconﬁguration and adaptability. In addition, the intelligence of underlying equipment should be enhanced in order to meet the requirements of Internet of Things (IoT).

2 In the network layer, Industrial Internet of Things (IIoT) should support new protocols and new data format with high ﬂexibility and scalability, whereas the Industrial Wireless Sensor Networks (IWSNs) bring new opportunities for development of industrial network. Additionally, the other relevant technologies (e.g., OLE for Process Control Uniﬁed Architecture (OPC UA), Software deﬁned Networks (SDNs), and Device-toDevice (D2D) communication) should be introduced to guarantee Quality-of-Service (QoS) of the network, reliable communication, and cooperation among equipment.

3 In the data application layer, the cloud platform should be able to analyze the semantics of various data. Therefore, ontology is being employed in modeling of the smart factory, which can provide the abilities of selforganization, self-learning and self-adaption. Moreover, data analysis could provide the scientiﬁc basis for decision-making, while data mining could be used to ensure design optimization and active maintenance.

1『这里看到了「the semantics of various data」，加了了在其他 Paper 里看到的「语义逻辑」，哈哈。（2021-01-29）』

In general, we developed and analyzed the hierarchical architecture of smart factory with the focus on key technologies of every layer. The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In Section II, the architecture of smart factory is presented, and approaches for implementation of smart factory based on hierarchical architecture are discussed. In Section III, the key technologies of physical resource layer are studied. In Section IV, technologies related to the network layer are given. The methods used for data processing in data application layer are presented in Section V. Its research results and development trends of these technologies are also presented. In Section VI, the implementation of smart factory, namely the prototype platform of candy packing line, was introduced, wherein the key technologies of the smart factory were employed and veriﬁed in practice. In Section VII, main issues and challenges of key technologies are presented. Finally, in Section VIII a brief conclusion and envisions of further development of smart factory are given.

3『

Google 搜索 CPS 信息：

Cyber-Physical Systems (CPS) are integrations of computation, networking, and physical processes. Embedded computers and networks monitor and control the physical processes, with feedback loops where physical processes affect computations and vice versa.

[网宇实体系统 - 维基百科，自由的百科全书](https://zh.wikipedia.org/wiki/%E7%B6%B2%E5%AE%87%E5%AF%A6%E9%AB%94%E7%B3%BB%E7%B5%B1)

网宇实体系统（Cyber-physical system）或称「虚实整合系统」是一个结合电脑运算领域以及感测器和致动器装置的整合控制系统。

目前已有某些领域出现似于 CPS 的电子控制整合系统，例如航空、汽车、化学制程、基础建设、能源、健康、制造、交通控制、娱乐和消费性电子产品，但目前这些系统通常都是嵌入式系统，嵌入式系统比较强调机器的计算能力，CPS 则更为强调各个实体装置和电脑运算网络的连结。CPS 是借用技术手段实现人的控制在时间、空间等方面的延伸，CPS 系统的本质就是人、机、物的融合计算。所以，国内又将 CPS 称为人机物融合系统。

和传统的嵌入式系统不同，一个完整的 CPS 被设计成一个实体装置的互动网络，而不只是一个单独运作的装置 [1]。这个概念类似于机器人网络和无线感测网络。据推测，接下来的数年在科学和工程的进步会使得计算和物理实体单元能够更紧密的互相结合，而使得 CPS 的适应性、自动化、效率、功能、可靠性、安全性和可用性大幅提升。科技进展也会让 CPS 在多个方面的可能应用变大，例如：行动介入（避免行为冲突）；精准度（机器手术和奈米层级的制造）; 在危险或是无法进入的环境下行动（搜寻和营救、消防和深海或太空探测）；协调（空中交通控制、战斗行动协调）；效率（零能源额外损耗建筑）；扩增人类的能力（医疗监控和照护）。[2]

美国国家科学基金会 （National Science Foundation,NSF）已经将 CPS 列入重点科研领域。[3] 从 2006 年末开始，美国国家科学基金会和其他美国的联邦机构赞助了一些 CPS 的研讨会。[4][5][6][7][8][9][10] 

于 2006 年在美国德州奥斯汀举办的 CPS 研讨会上，NSF 对 CPS 给出了如下的定义 [11] ：[12]

实体（Physical）：自然界中的或由人类制造的，遵循物理定理在连续的时间内运行的系统。

网络（Cyber）：利用计算、通信、及控制系统进行的离散及逻辑化管理。

网络实体系统：（Cyber-Physical System）：将实体与网络的各个组成部分在所有层面和维度上紧密结合的系统，对实体及网络进行对称性的深入管理。

CPS 实质上是一种多维度的智能技术体系，以大数据、网络与海量计算为依托，通过核心的智能感知、分析、挖掘、评估、预测、优化、协同等技术手段，将计算、通信、控制（Computing、Communication、Control，3C）有机融合与深度协作，做到涉及对象机理、环境、群体的网络空间与实体空间的深度融合。CPS 能够从实体空间（Physical Space）、环境、活动大数据的采集、存储、建模、分析、挖掘、评估、预测、优化、协同，并与对象的设计、测试和运行性能表征相结合，使网络空间（Cyber Space）与实体空间深度融合、实时交互、互相耦合、互相更新的网络空间（包括机理空间、环境空间与群体空间的结合）；进而，通过自感知、自记忆、自认知、自决策、自重构和智能支持促进工业资产的全面智能化 [13]。

#### CPS 的技术构架设计

在实施 CPS 技术的过程中遇到的一个重要挑战，是如何满足不同应用对象的差异化需求，以及各个系统之间问题和属性的差异性。因此，设计一个具有广泛适用性的 CPS 技术构架是十分重要的。

CPS 的技术设计与应用可以参照「5C」的体系 [14]，包括了 5 个层次的内容和构建模式：智能感知层（Connection）、信息挖掘层（Conversion）、网络层（Cyber）、认知层（Cognition）、和配置执行层（Configuration）[15]。

智能感知层的核心是建立一个物联网的构架，使得数据得以被以各种形式采集和汇聚，同时设备之间也可以进行通信和交流。信息挖掘层的核心是在设备端的嵌入式分析算法（Machine-based Algorithms）, 使得一部分数据能够在设备本地被分析和利用，实现本地的智能化。网络层是整个 CPS 系统数据处理、分发、决策、和调度控制的核心，在这里形成一个大数据环境，同时运行先进的分析算法进行大规模计算和知识挖掘。认知层的主要作用是识别与决策，通过分析当前系统中各个部分的任务目标和状态，制定协同优化的决策。配置执行层在接受到决策后，将决策按照各个子系统的运行逻辑转化成为它们听得懂的语言，将指令分发后由设备端的执行机构实施。

CPS 技术体系来看，核心在于以数据分析的能力创造新的价值，因此，这也决定了 CPS 技术的高可移植性、高通用性，应用范围可以涉及工厂车间、运输系统、能源行业等各个行业。在这里我们提出以 CPS 为核心的数据创值体系的「二维」应用战略：

在第一个维度上需要三个横向的应用基础：一是平台基础，即智能数据收集与平台运用；二是分析手段，即智能化的数据分析、管理、优化工具与软件应用；三是商业模式内核，即智能管理及服务体系的设计与应用。

在第二个维度上扩展在三个纵向的应用：一是基础的部件级应用，二是系统的装备级应用，三是成体系的应用链设计。

#### 实例

CPS 的主要应用在感测器系统和自动系统上，例如：有许多无线感测网络监控环境并且将资讯回传到主控节点。其他类型的 CPS 包括了自动车系统、医疗监控、流程控制系统、分散式机器人和航空自动驾驶系统。目前研发的 CPS 系统有 MIT 的 Distributed Robot Garden，这个花园里有一群的机器人负责照顾番茄。这个系统结合了感测网络 (每一株植物上都有感测器会去监控植物状态)、 导航、机器人控制和无线网络。

另外一个 MIT 正在发展的 CPS 系统是 CarTel 页面存档备份，存于互联网档案馆计划，这个计划里，有一队的计程车会搜集波士顿的即时交通资讯，路径规划就可以使用即时的交通资讯和历史资讯规划出最快的交通路径。

CPS 在制造行业的应用有巨大的潜力 [16]，制造系统中的每一个实体都可以通过 CPS 在网络端产生一个「镜像模型」（Cyber Twin），对实体进行深入对称性管理。实体产生的数据通过在网络空间内的分析，能够实时更新镜像模型的状参数，使镜像模型能够实时真实地反映实体的状态。同时利用镜像模型进行数字化仿真与优化，又能够对实体模型的行为进行指导，从而实现制造系统的自省性（self-aware）, 自比较性（self-compare），和自重构性（self-configure），最终实现无忧的智能制造系统 [17]。

』

### 02. Smart Factory Architecture

In the context of Industry 4.0, the intelligent manufacturing attracts enormous interest from government, enterprises and academic researchers [9]. Therefore, the construction patterns of smart factory are widely discussed. However, the standards for smart factory implementation have not been established yet. Benkamoun et al. [10] proposed a class diagram which can be used to represent the manufacturing system from different perspectives of entities and functions. Radziwon et al. [11] expounded former research from the concept of smart factory, and they pointed out that smart factory is actually an exploring of adaptive and ﬂexible manufacturing. Lin et al. [12] proposed an architecture for cloud manufacturing systems oriented to aerospace conglomerate, which facilitates optimal conﬁguration of manufacturing resources. 

1-2『目前个人比较认同 Radziwon et al. [11] 的观点，自适应和灵活性生产。然后发现这篇 Paper 已经下载了「2021011The Smart Factory: Exploring Adaptive and Flexible Manufacturing Solutions」并存入了 Zotero。（2021-01-29）』

The above-mentioned authors provided a guidance architecture for smart factory. In summary, the smart factory, which is based on digital and automated factory, uses information technology (e.g., cloud platform and IIoT) to improve the management of manufacturing resources and QoS [13], [14]. In order to build the smart factory, manufacturing enterprises should improve production and marketing, enhance controllability of production process, and reduce manual intervention in workshop. Through the analysis of manufacturing data, the smart factory can realize ﬂexible manufacturing, dynamic reconﬁguration, and production optimization, which are aimed to adapt the system to the changes of business model and consumer shopping behavior [15].

2『感觉 [13-15] 这篇 Paper 很重要。「2021025Context-Aware Cloud Robotics for Material Handling in Cognitive Industrial Internet of Things」目前没下载到原文，已下载「2021026Cloud Robotics: Current Status and Open Issues」、「2021006基于大数据的智慧工厂技术框架」并存入 Zotero。（2021-01-29）』

In the implementation of smart factory, the IIoT is employed to integrate the underlying equipment resources. Accordingly, the manufacturing system has abilities of perception, interconnection and data integration. The data analysis and scientiﬁc decision are used to achieve production scheduling, equipment service and quality control of products in smart factory. Further, the Internet of services is introduced to virtualize the manufacturing resources from a local database to the cloud server. Through the human-machine interaction, the global collaborative process of intelligent manufacturing oriented to the order-driven market is built. Therefore, the smart factory represents an engineering system that mainly consists of three aspects: interconnection, collaboration and execution. 

As shown in Fig. 1, the architecture of smart factory [16], [17] includes four layers, namely physical resource layer, network layer, data application layer, and terminal layer. With the aim to convert modern factory into smart factory, key technologies involved in all layers have to be studied in detail.

FIGURE 1. Hierarchical architecture of smart factory.

### 03. Physical Resources Layer

The physical resources include all manufacturing resources involved in the entire life cycle of manufacturing, which represent the basis for achievement of intelligent manufacturing. The efﬁcient manufacturing of customized products puts forward new demands on manufacturing equipment, production line and data acquisition. Therefore, to meet the requirements of smart factory, present problems of key technologies should be solved.

#### 3.1 Reconfigurable Manufacturing Unit

1『目前 Reconfigurable 翻译为「可重构」比较合适。（2021-01-29）』

Due to the lack of ﬂexible and conﬁgurable construction, current manufacturing equipment in workshop has strong speciﬁcity and relatively narrow application range, which results in weak adaptation to manufacturing environment changes. The manufacturing unit, which is modularized by manufacturing equipment (e.g., industrial robot, mechanical arm, and machining center), improves dynamic scheduling. Moreover, the controller is reconﬁgurable and provides an extension of manufacturing equipment functions.

#### 3.1.1 Modular Manufacturing Units

From the aspect of modular manufacturing units, Fiasché et al. [18] proposed a modular-adaptive and self-contained reconﬁgurable robotic island to improve assembly capacity of the workshop, where ﬂexible manufacturing ability was also enhanced by integrated management framework which controls and organizes the modular manufacturing unit. Piranda and Bourgeois [19] proposed a distributed algorithm for reconﬁguration of lattice-based modular self-reconﬁgurable robots, which drastically simpliﬁes complexity of robots conﬁguration through iterative approach. Further, Valente [20] proposed a vertical cyber physical integration of cognitive robots in manufacturing. The cognitive robots, which were vertically integrated into the manufacturing industry, and coordinated with the manufacturing execution system. In the context of intelligent manufacturing, the cognitive robots can perceive information uncertainty, change scheduling management and adjust manufacturing behavior to independently cope with a complex manufacturing problem. The intelligent level of smart factory is closely related to the modular manufacturing unit, and the above-mentioned literature describes the intelligent robot units from different perspectives. The modular manufacturing units can work independently and deal with a changeable scheduling of smart factory.

Therefore, it is very important to enhance the intelligence of robots units. Several suggestions for construction of modular manufacturing units are proposed as follows:

1 Modular manufacturing units should cooperate with each other to accomplish the common tasks, where the emphasis is on the mutual perception and the collaboration mechanism between intelligent modules. In addition, heterogeneity of interaction should be took account.

2 The functions of different modular manufacturing units may be redundant for a certain product, therefore it is crucial to make an optimal or suboptimal combinatorial scheme.

1『又看见冗余性「redundant」。（2021-01-29）』

3 Each manufacturing unit can not only meet the manufacturing requirements of products, but also improve the smart factory efﬁciency in a self-organized way.

In the intelligent manufacturing, small quantities of various products enter into manufacturing system disorderly, which certainly leads to the deadlock phenomenon. Currently, approach for deadlock prevention in ﬂexible manufacturing systems is a hot research topic [21], [22].

#### 3.1.2 Configurable Controller

The conﬁgurability of the control system refers to the ability to integrate, extend, replace, and reuse hardware or software components of the system. Proper conﬁguration of controller can improve conﬁgurability of manufacturing unit, which expands unit’s function in multi-application scenarios. In this way, manufacturing unit would be able to adapt swiftly to operation condition changes [23], [24].

Short and Burn [25] upgraded robot function using available software components, which were used to adapt the robot to changeable operating conditions. Moreover, they introduced an advanced design of robot controller which can be used in the new generation of robots. 

Morales-Velazquez et al. [26] developed a new multi-agent distributed controller system to meet the requirements of intelligent reconﬁgurable Computer Numerical Control (CNC). Speciﬁcally, they proposed an open architecture for reconﬁgurable applications based on a Field Programmable Gate Array (FPGA) and utilized an eXtensible Markup Language (XML) structure to describe system ﬁles. 

Since the component models of a control system can improve the reconﬁguration processes by standardization and universality, the embedded design tools such as Ptolemy II have been matured for component model. The service oriented technology with the semantic web theory is employed to adapt external demand on industry control domain. However, this static-related reconﬁgurable technology cannot meet dynamic requirements. Lepuschitz et al. [27] proposed an automation agent-based architecture which subdivides the control layer into two layers, where the high-level layer is combined with the ontology while the low-level layer is based on the IEC 61499 standard. The low-level control is modiﬁed by the reasoning and initiating reconﬁguration processes of high-level layer. Hence, the control system provides the selfreconﬁguration and self-adaption services. However, the current research still lacks the validation techniques for the strict background. 

1-2『这里又看到语义逻辑，Paper [27] 应该很重要。对自己理解智慧工厂的「autonomy and sociality」应该很有帮助，可惜目前没下载到原文「2021029Toward Self-Reconfiguration of Manufacturing Systems Using Automation Agents」。（2021-01-29）』

Based to normalized structure of reconﬁgurable logic controller, Adamski and Tkacz [28] proposed a hierarchical modular control logic described by a petri net where the formal reasoning method is used to predict results of a logic design. With the development of equipment computing ability, it has become a trend to apply the multi-agent technology, knowledge modeling, and reasoning technology in the control system.

The research of conﬁgurable controller mainly focuses on its structure and function. General, an information model is built in the control system to perceive operation condition, while reasoning decision is made according to the information of evaluation module. Moreover, the controller system completes reconﬁguration planning and implements processes automatically for speciﬁc needs. However, lack of support for interoperable technology, such as interactive interface, results in poor ﬂexibility. The basic theory from reconﬁgurable aspect (e.g., ontology modeling and veriﬁcation) is still weak. Moreover, dynamic re-conﬁguration mechanism is not perfect and research results are only applicable to the speciﬁc scenarios. Thus, more attention should be paid to the embedded component model in real-time running framework. Therefore, the knowledge-driven adaptive re-conﬁguration is crucial for the implementation of reconﬁgurable service.

#### 3.2 Reconfigurable Production Line

Nowadays the manufacturing products in the market are characterized by small batches and multiple varieties. Therefore, the production-line should reconﬁgure its process paths and recombine manufacturing units dynamically. Accordingly, the smart factory should adjust product type and production capacity in real-time. 

Kim et al. [29] proposed an application service based on information and communication technology convergence to support the re-conﬁgurability of door trim assembly line, where the emphases is on minimization of reconstruction complexity and maximization of workbench recyclability. 

Järvenpää et al. [30] proposed an ontology model and a description concept for manufacturing resources based on XML, and developed a set of integrated tools to reconﬁgure production system rapidly and automatically. 

Gyulai et al. [31] introduced a hierarchical planning decision workﬂow to assign products to dedicated and reconﬁgurable production lines, which denotes an integrated way to optimize system conﬁguration and production plan. 

Goyal and Jain [32] divided the optimization design of reconﬁgurable production line into two stages. In the ﬁrst stage, a multiple-objective particle swarm algorithm was proposed to optimize cost, machine utilization, operational capability, and conﬁguration convertibility. At the next stage, a maximum deviation method was used to choose an optimal scheme from the alternatives in order to avoid both subjectivity and uncertainty in decision-making process.

The reconﬁgurable production line can generate a large range of different products due to its variability, scalability and schedulability, which is the basis of ﬂexible manufacturing in smart factory. Presently, the problem of production line is strong specialty, which can be enhanced by advance planning and control methods. Here, we build a reconﬁgurable system to simulate the production line and propose a scheme for reconﬁguration. The feasibility of proposed scheme is veriﬁed by the manufacturing scenario. With the aim to respond timely to the market requirements, it is necessary to implement a reconﬁgurable production line in the smart factory.

#### 3.3 Intelligent Data Acquisition

The manufacturing resource data denote basic information for workshop scheduling and intelligent service in smart factory. The wireless sensor networks (WSNs) are employed in smart factory for data monitoring, acquisition and logging. Based on data analysis and using an intelligent equipment in manufacturing scenarios, the manufacturing execution system can properly implement production scheduling. 

The most common types of wireless sensor networks are Radio Frequency Identiﬁcation (RFID) [33], ZigBee, and Bluetooth. Zhong et al. [34] proposed a RFID-enabled real-time manufacturing execution system for mass-customization production, where RFID identiﬁes anomalous information and feeds it back to the decision-making production system in realtime, thus the smart factory has more efﬁcient execution plans and makes accurate scheduling decisions. 

Zhang et al. [35] proposed a new data cleaning algorithm based on WSNs and RFID, where WSNs and RFID system provide an excellent infrastructure for data acquisition, distribution, and processing. With the development of RFID, the Near-Field Communication (NFC) has been studied as an access to manufacturing resources [36]. Further, both Bluetooth and ZigBee meet the requirements for cost of industrial automation of wireless communication technologies (e.g., low price and low energy consumption) [37].

Various kinds of special sensors are used to collect data in manufacturing area, wherein devices are independent of each other. The collected data are heterogeneous with uneven quality. Therefore, the communication interface of intelligent equipment should be compatible with a series of communication protocols. For instance, it should be compatible with OPC, Open Database Connectivity (ODBC), RS232, Dynamic data exchange (DDE), etc., which are used to connect control systems such as Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition (SCADA), Distributed Control System (DCS), and Process Control System (PCS). In addition, data acquisition devices should be easily set up and their interfaces should be ﬂexible and scalable. The manufacturing resources should support a ﬁne-grained data acquisition in process visibility system. As show in Fig. 2, the equipment operating state is similar to the human heart beating. The equipment health management system, which is based on the monitoring equipment status obtained by the electrocardiograph (EGC), can predict system failure and arrange necessary maintenance activity in advance. However, current pattern of data acquisition is still a bottleneck of intelligent manufacturing.

FIGURE 2. Dynamic electrocardiogram system.

### 04. Network Layer

Industrial networks represent the integration of various kinds of network technologies such as ﬁeld bus and sensor networks. The network layer, which is characterized by perception and control, plays an important role in the smart factory. Due to the improvements of cloud computing technology [38], real-time and reliable network techniques are required for data transmission, information sharing between intelligent equipment, and manufacturing cloud platform. The advanced information technologies (e.g., IWSNs and ﬁeld bus) and their related technologies provide an important way to meet above mentioned requirements. Field buses (e.g., Foundation Fieldbus (FF), Proﬁbus, and Hart) gradually meet enterprise requirements of open, universal and compatible networks, and most of them have already been Standardized [39], [40]. However, there are still many issues such as routing, congestion control, errors handling and seg mentation technology in network layer. The IWSNS and the other related technologies involved in the smart factory are discussed in the following.

#### 4.2 Industrial Wireless Sensor Networks

The Industrial Wireless Sensor Networks (IWSNs) represent the expansion and promotion of the existing wireless communication technology intended for industrial application and they lead to the revolution of measurement and control mode in the traditional industrial field. In the meantime the deployment of industrial networks has become flexible reliable, and low-cost. Currently, the universal and mature wireless network communication standards mainly include ireless HART, WTA-AP, and ISA100.11a. The application of industrial networks is complex, and it is difficulty to introduce a generic wireless network communication standard. The industrial wireless network technology should have low latency, high reliability, and high synchronous accuracy when dealing with a control service, and should have high access density and low power consumption in data acquisition. The networks should also have a high transmission rate of interactive service.

Reliability and latency are the core requirements of industrial wireless network communication [41], [42]. The wireless network technology has gradually permeated into the industrial ﬁeld including data acquisition and production control. The workshop is characterized by a complicated electromagnetic environment. Meanwhile, data transmission may be unsynchronized with the clock causing packet loss and delay or some other interference factors, which have negative effect on QoS of IWSNs. 

Niu et al. [43] presented a reliable reactive routing enhancement to increase the resilience of WSNs/IWSNs to link dynamics, which provides reliable and energy-efﬁcient packet delivery regardless the unreliable wireless links. Therefore, both high reliability and low delivery latency are guaranteed. Dobslaw et al. [44] proposed a generic heuristic scheduling algorithm extension to improve the end-to-end reliability of WSNs. In summary, IWSNs are complex dynamical networks which couple real-time control with high-speed communication using a multi-node collaboration.

Energy efﬁciency is an important factor that affects adaptability of wireless sensor networks [45]. Due to the large number of nodes in IWSNs, a dynamic scheduling is needed in intelligent manufacturing. Gao et al. [46] improved energy efﬁciency with the coded preambles in low-power sensor networks. Lee et al. [47] proposed FlexiCast which uses an energy-efﬁcient method to check the integrity of software objects, and it signiﬁcantly reduces energy consumption for both software object updating and modiﬁcation checking. Luo et al. [48] achieved energy saving using an opportunistic routing algorithm that ensures a minimal-power low-residual energy, and which is focused on minimization of energy consumption and maximization of network lifetime of data relay in one-dimensional queue networks. The current researches on energy efﬁciency are mainly based on following aspects: improvement of data forwarding mechanism of sensor itself, optimization of deployment of network nodes, and development of new energy-saving algorithms. Along with the expanded deployment of IWSNs to enhance energy efﬁciency more attention should be paid to continuity.

Since the wireless communication has a character of radio broadcasting, wireless networks are easily accessed by both authorized users and unauthorized visitors. For that reason, IWSNs are more vulnerable than industrial wire networks, and invasive intrusion may lead to serious consequences for smart factory. Sun et al. [49] proposed a fountain-coding (FC) aided relaying scheme, where a secure cooperative transmission is guaranteed by accumulating the required number of FC packets. Zou and Wang [50] proposed an optimal sensor scheduling scheme to improve the physical-layer security of industrial WSNs against the eavesdropping attack, and they also conducted an asymptotic intercept probability analysis to characterize diversity gains of round-robin scheduling and optimal sensor scheduling. Dong and Liu [51] proposed robust and secure time-synchronization protocol to defend from Sybil attacks to the sensor networks. Due to limited computing power and networks resources, it is impossible to apply generic security protocols and mechanisms directly to the IWSNs. Therefore, IWSNs are faced with greater security challenges than public networks.

The equipment monitoring and information interaction are convenient for smart factory with IWSNs because they accelerate the progress of intelligent manufacturing. The IWSNs should meet the requirements for reliability and real-time data transmission. Because of uncertainty of position, energy efﬁciency of IWSNs constrains its expansion. When a largescale equipment accesses to the industrial networks, network security is very important. In the IWSNs scenarios such as mass connection, low-power consumption, and wide coverage, new wireless communication technologies (e.g., NB-IoT, 5G, LTE, and 3GPP) provide low latency and high reliability. However, certain measures should be taken to improve robustness of signal propagation in complex electromagnetic environment and extend working hours of networks nodes. Accordingly, networks standardization and security defense need further improvement.

#### 4.3 Related Technologies

The application of network technology in smart factory provides reliable and supportable information service. However, the implementation of industrial internet still faces with many problems such as information interaction between equipment, ﬂexible conﬁguration of networks, and transmission delay. Some of key related technologies are described in detail in the following.

#### 4.3.1 OPC UA-Based Interactor in Multi-Agent Systems

The intelligent manufacturing system is a multi-agent system which consists of task-driven intelligent equipment, where agent is characterized by autonomy, heterogeneity and decentralization [22]. Leitão et al. [52] pointed out that OPC UA is transferred from the original communication architecture (e.g., the Component Object Model (COM) standard) to the service-oriented architecture with a cross platform, in which way the communication among equipment and intelligent manufacturing system is provided. With the standardization of OPC UA, a new opportunity for multi-agent technology is created. 

Girbea et al. [53] designed a service-oriented architecture for optimization of industrial application, where OPC UA is used to connect every sub-manufacturing system and ensure real-time communication between devices in standardized and uniﬁed manner. Fernbach et al. [54] proposed an OPC UA information modelling framework which provides a holistic information base. Hence, the multi-agent architecture can integrate agent-based system into the existing manufacturing site using a semantic method.

The multi-agent system is a system of coordinated solving of large-scale complex problems with the cooperation of every agent. Besides data transmission, the OPC UA can be used to integrate production data into manufacturing environment and provide semantic annotation for every agent. Due to the construction of data source and receiver, the OPC UA can allocate all manufacturing resources including embedded system to the speciﬁc areas and extensible computing nodes through the address space and pre-deﬁned model. Further, the OPC UA solves the problem related to uniﬁed access to the information of different systems. The OPC UA-based interaction in multi-agent systems makes all agent coordinate with each other to solve problems in a parallel manner, which effectively improves the problem solving efﬁciency. Thus, the development of OPC UA is of high importance because of redundancy, which is featured with adjustable overdue settings, error detection, and automatic correction. Therefore, the communication tools which are in accordance with the OPC UA standard can deal with the communication errors and failures easily.

#### 4.3.2 Software Defined Industrial Networks

Network technology is used to integrate internal and external resources in smart factory in order to form comprehensive, uniﬁed, and high covering manufacturing resource. Therefore, it is crucial to achieve network scalability and adaptive transmission [55], [56]. Making network conﬁguration ﬂexible is a key issue for researchers. The SDNs simplify the required hardware with centralized control by a software, which facilitates network management and satisﬁes requirements of dynamic networks for intelligent manufacturing [57], [58].

As the IIoT advances, the network becomes overloaded due to a large number of connections between heterogeneous equipment. Bizanis and Kuipers [59] supposed that SDNs and networks virtualization technology provide scale and versatility necessary for IoT service, and they pointed out that SDNs could be used together with machine learning technology to make network more intelligent and self-adaptive.

Wan et al. [60] proposed a software-deﬁned IIoT architecture which can determine network resource allocation and accelerate information exchange by an easily customizable networking protocol. Using this architecture, some innovative industrial applications can be realized through well-deﬁned APIs. The OpenFlow [61], [62], which is a novel switched internetwork model, promotes implementation of SDNs [63]. The application of OpenFlow drastically reduces complexity of control plane, increases programmability and extensibility, and provides a gradual adoption path [64]. Though the OpenFlow is not a sole standard that supports SDN technology, its rules have been generally accepted. Namely, the OpenFlowbased SDN deployment has been already used in industrial scenarios, such as intranets and data center.

Currently, the basic network system of manufacturing enterprises is consisted of different types of communication devices (e.g., routers, switches, and services). Therefore, present network management problems are as follows: 1) work-ﬂow of network security is complex [65], and it is difﬁcult to locate network failure; 2) traditional networks cannot effectively support a real-time cloud manufacturing; in addition, it is crucial to establish the coordination in multilayer network; and lastly, 3) it is difﬁcult to adjust network bandwidth in real time according to the ﬂow demand of data acquisition, which leads to low utilization of network resources. The solutions to the above problems require an intelligent network management. The SDNs framework, which makes network programmable by separating the control layer from the data transmission layer is presented in Fig. 3. This separation meets demand on centralized control of network and increases ﬂexibility of conﬁguration and operation of data center. The OpenFlow-based SDNs provide a good platform for innovative network applications and development of IIoT.

FIGURE 3. The SDN framework in smart factory.

#### 4.3.3 Device to Device Communication

The contradictions between rapid growth of intelligent equipment and limited bandwidth of industrial networks become increasingly prominent in smart factory [66], [67]. The D2D communication refers to the communication wherein devices directly exchange information with neighbors under the control of communication system. In common cellular networks, an intelligent equipment can use D2D communication technology for direct communication via an isotropic antenna at every base station. This technology provides a new way for low-latency communication, large data transmission, and massive access to the mobile terminal. Holfeld et al. [68] stated that LTE-based wireless technology can provide new services for factory automation. On the other hand, 5G communication technology brings new opportunities to the automated wireless communication technology. Liu et al. [69] described the challenges and potential solutions to the implementation of machine-type communication system and presented a roadmap of current cellular technologies toward 5G mobile systems capable of fully-machine type communication(MTC). Pratas and Popovski [70] proposed networkassisted D2D schemes that enable the cooperation between machine-type devices and standard cellular devices, and meet the MTC outage requirement by maximizing the rate of broadband services. Bagaa et al. [71] proposed an optimal solution that uses D2D communication to reduce the overhead of MTC devices in 5G networks, and which aims to decrease energy consumption and data transfer delay at eNodeBs. Yu et al. [72] proposed a D2D-communicationbased system underlying cellular networks to improve local services, where optimal resource allocation and power control between cellular and D2D connections were analyzed for different resource sharing modes.

Once the D2D communication link is established in communication network, data transmission is free of core device and interference from the middleware, which can reduce pressure on core network in communication system, improve spectrum utilization and networks throughput, and expand network capacity. The D2D-based communication in smart factory is presented in Fig. 4. The D2D communication technology brings high-quality network services to the intelligent manufacturing. Although, a small-scale distribution of data packets is more convenient, there are still many challenges related to the introduction of D2D communication technology into cellular networks. For instance, it is difﬁcult to switch network interaction from D2D communication to cellular communication, and spectrum reuse in D2D communication causes interference.

#### 4.3.4 Edge Computing

Edge computing denotes an open platform with many features such as networking, computing, storage, and application. Edge computing is performed at the network edge near to device or data source. Moreover, edge computing provides intelligent services that meet key requirements of intelligent manufacturing for agile connection, real-time processing, data cleaning, and privacy protection [73], [74]. Brito et al. [75] supposed that deployment of programmable fog nodes, which is attributed to inter-node Peer-to-Peer (P2P) communication and services orchestration without centralized control, could increase ﬂexibility, reliability and efﬁciency. Pizoń et al. [76] argued that edge computing enables dynamic monitoring and control of manufacturing process. Meanwhile they pointed out that edge computing requires special IT ecosystem to build dynamic systems for transfer of production data. Georgakopoulos et al. [77] presented a manufacturing roadmap of IoT and edge cloud computing to address elastic and virtual manufacturing resources, which provides opportunities for real-time monitoring of production KPIs and smart inventory management.

In the context of distributed computing based on heterogeneous networks, the concept of edge computing is closely related to distributed autonomy in industry. Edge computing combines disperse treatment with centralized upload. This mode provides an effective use of network bandwidth and ensures autonomy, security and robustness of manufacturing system. Fig. 5 shows the generic architecture of edge computing. The middle layer is edge computing platform. The lower layer controls manufacturing equipment with the characteristics of low latency, interoperability, autonomy, and adaptability.

FIGURE 5. The generic architecture of edge computing.

The upper layer reduces pressure to the core network, optimizes data transmission, and provides support for application extension. The edge computing integrates operation technology with ICT, while its distributed control system interacts with physical system with high stability. Additionally, edge computing makes a full use of embedded computing of terminal-side equipment, which provides autonomy of equipment with a disperse treatment. Meanwhile, the edge computing that is coordinated with cloud computing increases intelligence of the entire manufacturing system. As edge intelligence advances, communication and computing performances in distributed perception, decisionmaking and control will change signiﬁcantly.

### 05. Data Application Layer

The semantic association between manufacturing data is established by ontology model [78]. The essence of data application is to discover knowledge from data resources and build the industrial value chain. The industrial big data mainly include structured data and semi-structured data. As data mining technology advances, data-driven innovation will further promote intelligent manufacturing.

#### 5.1 Ontology-Based Manufacturing Model

Considering the large amount of manufacturing resources, resources concept may vary among different perspectives. A formal description is presented by ontology for domain knowledge. Namely, ontology is a semantic representation of related concepts and their relationship in intelligent manufacturing. It is signiﬁcant to construct the ontology for knowledge sharing, reuse, and reasoning. 

3『

[本体论 (哲学) - 维基百科，自由的百科全书](https://zh.wikipedia.org/wiki/%E6%9C%AC%E4%BD%93%E8%AE%BA_(%E5%93%B2%E5%AD%A6))

本体论（Ontology），又译存在论、存有论，是形而上学的基本分支，本体论主要探讨存有本身，即一切现实事物的基本特征。

有的哲学家，如柏拉图学派认为：任何一个名词都对应着一个实际存在；另外一些哲学家则主张有一些名词并不代表存在的实体，而只代表一种集合的概念，包括事物或事件，也有抽象的，由人类思维产生的事物。例如「社团」就代表一群具有同一性质的人组成的集合；「几何」就代表一种特殊知识的集合等。

本体论就是「研究到底哪些名词代表真实的存在实体，哪些名词只是代表一种概念」。所以本体论成为某些哲学分支的基础。近年来，人工智能及资讯技术相关领域的学者也开始将本体论的观念用在知识表达上，即借由本体论中的基本元素：概念及概念间的关连，作为描述真实世界的知识模型。针对此一趋势，W3C 组织也开始定义了许多本体论的相关语言，如 RDF、DAML+OIL、OWL 等。

』

Chungoora et al. [79] presented a model-driven method with ontology to achieve the interoperability and the knowledge sharing for manufacturing system across multiple platforms in product lifecycle. Usman et al. [80] supposed that a veriﬁable formal semantic base could solve the problem of inappropriate interpretation of manufacturing concepts, and that formal manufacturing reference ontology is a key component of future interoperable manufacturing system. Wang et al. [81] proposed a cloudbased manufacturing semantic model which can be used to obtain general task ontology construction and task subontology matching. Alsaﬁ and Vyatkin [82] proposed an approach for fast reconﬁguration of modular manufacturing systems, which is based on the reconﬁguration agent with ontology. The ontology-based model achieves standardized terms and semantic knowledge for decision-making or other applications in intelligent manufacturing [83].

The ontology-based modeling of manufacturing resources provides a novel technical reference for construction of smart factory. Due to the improvement of manufacturing system conﬁguration, the ontology-based model promotes event-driven interoperability in smart factory. Ontology-based applications are able to optimize scheduling for manufacturing resources and provide a semantic basis for consistent description of interactions between different applications. The modeling language for manufacturing ontology (e.g., the Web Ontology Language) has rich semantic expression ability and support reasoning mechanism. Additionally, the ontology-based modeling for intelligent manufacturing should align the following criteria: clarity, consistency, extendibility, coding minimum deviation, and ontology minimum commitment.

As shown in Fig. 6, the ontology-based modeling combines knowledge base with database to achieve semantic reasoning, and this method decouples data processing from speciﬁc applications. The data-centric architecture has both ﬂexibility and universality. The ontology-based manufacturing model provides a new research direction in fault diagnosis, equipment health prediction, and active preventive maintenance in smart factory.

FIGURE 6. Ontology-based domain modeling method.

#### 5.2 Applications of Big Data Manufacturing

The big data in smart factory mainly include real-time sensor data, machine log, and manufacturing process data, which have large volume, multiple sources, and spare value. In the context of intelligent manufacturing, the applications of big data develop rapidly in industrial supply chain analysis and optimization, product quality control, and active maintenance [84]–[87].

#### 5.2.1 Active Maintenance Based on Big Data

Proper operation of intelligent equipment is a guarantee of continuous production in the smart factory, where operation conditions have an important impact on equipment utilization and productivity. Data mining technology brings new breakthroughs to failure prediction and actie maintenance. Wan et al. [88] proposed a manufacturing big data solution for active preventive maintenance in manufacturing environment, which combines a real-time active maintenance mechanism with an off-line prediction method. Regev and Benson-Karhi [89] proposed a segmented model for preventive maintenance of semiconductor manufacturing equipment, namely they presented both parametric and non-parametric models for preventive maintenance. Hashemian and Bean [90] discussed the limitations of timebased equipment maintenance methods and advantages of predictive and online maintenance techniques for early identiﬁcation of equipment failure. Xiong et al. [91] used data mining to identify bearing faults in wind turbines, and they built models for bearing faults prediction based on historical wind turbine data.

FIGURE 7. Open application architecture for active maintenance based on manufacturing big data.

The regular maintenance in traditional mode just wastes resource and time. In contrast, active maintenance based on big data can provide necessary maintenance service. The active maintenance reduces machine downtime, optimizes resource utilization, and increases production. In the meantime, the maintenance cost is also reduced. The open application architecture of active maintenance based on manufacturing big data is presented in Fig. 7. The requirements for active maintenance of production facilities are as follows: 1) improve intelligence of workshop equipment; 2) cooperate with domain experts; and 3) express knowledge professionally. The machine learning and statistical analysis are the mainstream approaches of active maintenance. However, many factors should be considered. Such as uncertainty of production process, integration of different methods and model applicability. Presently, active maintenance of complex equipment still lacks the effective methods, thus further improvement is needed.

#### 5.2.2 Product Design Optimization Based on Manufacturing Big Data

With the development of IoT technology, it becomes convenient to collect the product data. At present, the optimization based on big data in manufacturing is effective on the stages of logistics, warehousing, and selling. Analysis technology based on big data is used in product design, which takes advantage of knowledge discovery and trend prediction of data. Graening and Sendhoff [92] proposed a shape mining as a framework, based on engineering design data, which was applied to the passenger car design. Williams et al. [93] developed a big data management infrastructure with semantic technologies, which provides uniﬁed data access layer and consistent approach to analytic execution. Bae and Kim [94] proposed the apriori and C5.0 algorithms for data mining, and mining results were attributed as knowledge to provide the suggestions for product design and marketing. However, if data receiver and feedback mechanism are added to the traditional product, the product itself will become the data source for design optimization without affecting its use.

In addition, the product logs, maintenance data, and user data will become the valuable resources to build product information model. The scientiﬁc and reasonable product evaluation results can be obtained by data fusion and data mining, thus these technologies represent the basis for design of a next-generation product.

Data mining helps designers to transform big data into enlightening knowledge using selection, analysis and modeling methods. The data fusion technology can analyze the same object based on multiple data resource. The data mining technology is introduced in optimization of product design because it can deal with fuzzy and uncertain reasoning results caused by a designer. However, the product optimization design based on big data lacks the knowledge discovery tools. Therefore, we cannot take full advantage of potential information from design examples. The decision-making, which is based on existing knowledge, is less ﬂexible in design optimization. The product design optimization based on big data requires multidisciplinary knowledge. Therefore, the other interdisciplinarities associated with big data, such as deep learning and artiﬁcial intelligent, have become important research directions in product design optimization.

### 06. Application Case Study

From the view of intelligent manufacturing, manufacturing equipment should be equipped with the abilities of edge computing, environment perception, and coordination between equipment. The smart factory, which is a cyber-physical production system (CPPS), integrates intelligent sensors, embedded terminal systems, intelligent control system, and communications facilities. The peer to peer interaction (e.g., person to equipment, equipment to equipment, service to service) is achieved by CPPS. Therefore, building of smart factory should take into consideration manufacturing characteristics to meet rapidly-changing market needs [95], [96]. In the following, we use the laboratory prototype platform as an example to explore typical characteristics of smart factory. The laboratory prototype platform, which represents a candy packing production line, is shown in Fig. 8.

FIGURE 8. Prototype platform for the validation of key technologies.

1『看到这张图里的机器手臂，想到了以后车间的操作人员肯定会被机器人取代。（2021-01-29）』

According to the smart factory architecture, the prototype platform had four layers including the physical resources layer, the cloud service layer, the terminal layer, and the network layer. The prototype layers were as follows.

1 The physical resources layer was consisted of intelligent equipment, conveyor equipment, packing products. It was mainly responsible for execution of tasks such as processing, monitoring, and assembling. The manufacturing process information was the primary data source for upper application.

2 The cloud service layer contained the cloud platform (a service cluster system based on the Hadoop architecture) which provided data storage and computing resource for data application. The ontology model of packing line was built on the cloud platform, and a relationship between objects was established in two dimensions: structure and interaction. The Protégé was used to build application-oriented ontology, and complex constraints were expressed by semantic web rule language. The manufacturing data were uploaded to the cloud platform to form a semantic data model. Based on the knowledge base, the Jena tool was used to reason the equipment operating mode. This layer provides supports for the fault alarm, the resource allocation, and the scheduling optimization.

3 The terminal layer mainly included end-user devices, such as smart phones, desktop computers and electrical boards, which were distributed in workshop, ofﬁce, monitoring center and other regions. Terminal devices were used to visualize the results of cloud processing, and they supported remote monitoring of operation and maintenance. Moreover, customers were able to check the order in real time using the intelligent terminal.

4 The network layer was used to connect layers within smart factory. According to the distributed control, the connection between controller and actuator was implemented by ﬁeld bus, Modbus, and EtherCAT. The connection between equipment was achieved by the combination of Ethernet and DDS, which formed the self-organized network. The connection between equipment and cloud platform was implemented by integration of Ethernet and OPC UA, which provided data interaction.

The basic ﬂow of candy packing is as follows. Firstly, customers choose candy and purchase it online. Then, the order information is sent directly to the manufacturing system. Finally, the completed order is automatically transported by logistical system of smart factory. The candy packaging line has typical characteristics of smart factory, such as high interconnection, dynamical reconﬁguration, deep integration, and so on.

In the experiment, we took into account factors such as equipment availability, equipment performance, and qualiﬁed rate of products. Next, we developed a cloud-aided manufacturing system, which gave suggestions on scheduling optimization of self-organized equipment. The six-month experiment was performed on the equipment of candy packaging line. The smart meter is used to measure the total electrical energy for the equipment in the lab. We calculated the related parameter every day, and the average was took as the value of the month. As shown in Fig. 9, the Overall Equipment Effectiveness (OEE) of tested equipment is improved from 0.42 to 0.82 using the cloud-aided manufacturing system. Compared to the centralized scheduling, the self-organized scheduling with the cloud-aided manufacturing system has more remarkable effect. In general, the candy packing line is an example which was used to explore ﬂexibility, efﬁciency, and transparency of smart factory.

FIGURE 9. The overall effectiveness and influential factors of prototyping platform.

2『这里糖果包装线的智慧工厂案例蛮不错的，做一张主题卡片。（2021-01-29）』——已完成

### 07. Issues and Challenges

Due to the rapid progress of manufacturing, smart factory should be ﬂexible and reliable, and satisfy the high quality standards. The technological breakthroughs bring many opportunities for the implementation of intelligent manufacturing. However, there are still some issues and challenges.

#### 7.1 Intelligent Requirements of Equipment

Due to the foundation place of the underlying equipment, it is crucial to monitor and control the underlying manufacturing resource for reconﬁguration of production line, dynamic scheduling, and information fusion in smart factory. Therefore, it is necessary to improve the intelligence level of manufacturing equipment. The conﬁgurable controller and self-reconﬁgurable robots can provide potential solutions to function expansion of manufacturing units. In the context of hybrid production, the coordination and information interaction among the multi-module manufacturing units should be explored. The optimized combination of programs should be made to enhance the workshop efﬁciency. The intelligent equipment should be able to collect production information, provide compatible data interface, and support generic communication protocol. In addition, the equipment could perceive manufacturing environment and cooperate with other equipment in smart factory. Flexible manufacturing is a typical feature of smart factory, but there are still many problems such as strong proprietary of production line, dynamic scheduling, and tight coupling between functions and devices.

In the context of intelligent manufacturing, the data generated by intelligent equipment is mostly unstructured.

The high-speed operation in workshop needs higher standards of data acquisition. Namely, data acquisition is the basis of big data analytics, where physical resource should: (1) support ﬁne-grained and efﬁcient data acquisition, and achieve visibility of manufacturing process; (2) integrate heterogeneous data in a uniﬁed system by generic protocols (e.g., RFID, ZigBee, and NFC); and (3) improve extensibility of controller for access to the core industrial networks.

#### 7.2 Deep Integration Networks

The IIoT facilitates a deep integration of information and industrialization. The advanced IIoT technology is important for the implementation of the smart factory. The mature and generic standards have not been formed yet in the ﬁeld of IWSNs, and the standardization process of IWSNs should be promoted continuously. In the complicated electromagnetic environment, data transmission should meet the requirements of reliability and real time equipment control. Due to the limited energy, energy efﬁciency is a key issue that affects the deployment of IWSNs. Moreover, because of the access of large-scale devices, network security also becomes very important. As the information technologies have advanced (e.g., NB-IoT, 5G, LTE-Advanced, and 3GPP), a signiﬁcant progress has been made in industrial wireless networks. These progress has provided new solutions for key issues of IWSNs, such as reliability, real-time performance, energy efﬁciency, and security strategy.

Development of information technologies has brought opportunities to the intelligent manufacturing. The OPC UA-based interaction facilitates the coordination between intelligent agents because a multi-agent system can solve problems in a parallel way. The OpenFlow-based SDN technology provides more ﬂexible solution for network conﬁguration, which enhances network management ability. The D2D technology makes communication between devices more efﬁcient and expands network capacity. The edge computing equips terminal system with decision-making ability and autonomy. Additionally, high transmission rate of data, low duty cycle, and IP network availability are the requirements of network layer which denote the foundation for ubiquitous communication in smart factory.

#### 7.3 Knowledge-Driven Manufacturing

The large amount of manufacturing data provides a comprehensive description of the smart factory, but manufacturing data cannot be utilized directly due to high dimension, variable metric, and high noise. Consequently, it is important to deﬁne the data semantic through the manufacturing glossary. The domain ontology provides a potential solution to data semantic for data application. Using the big data of intelligent manufacturing, the active maintenance of equipment, the optimization design for manufacturing product, and the optimization of production line is achieved in the smart factory. The knowledge-driven manufacturing brings opportunities to transformation from traditional industry to intelligent industry, meanwhile the data mining technology is a serious challenge to enterprises. Moreover, the data-based optimization of product design needs to add data receiver and feedback mechanism to the traditional product, and then the product itself will become the data source. Consequently, the product will become a participant in the process of data collection, which provides technical information to the product designer.

In order to achieve a knowledge-based intelligent manufacturing, the manufacturing entity should be able to provide data collection, data fusion, and extraction of manufacturing resource characteristics. The smart factory should integrate data resources (e.g., supply chains, product data, and logistic data) into service platform, which provides product services such as sales forecasting and quality analysis. In general, data mining and knowledge discovery provide a scientiﬁc decision for planning and scheduling of manufacturing product.

### 08. Conclusions

The smart factory is an intelligent production system which utilizes the integration of manufacturing and services. It integrates communication process, computing process, and control process to meet the industrial demands. In this paper, we proposed the hierarchical architecture of smart factory according to the newly research. Then the main issues of key technologies involved in the physical resource layer, the network layer, and the data application layer in the smart factory are analyzed, and some application cases were discussed to explore potential solutions for key technologies. Finally we established veriﬁcation platform by means of the proposed key technologies, which showed that the OEE ration is improved. The compound talents and multi-ﬁeld cooperation is required for the implementation of smart factory. The research of key technologies not only refers to the integration of information technology as a main body, but also includes the traditional disciplines such as control theory, mechanical technology, and materials and energy. As the big data technology advances, the data-based virtual manufacturing mode will improve product quality, increase production efﬁciency, and reduce energy consumption. Furthermore, the intelligent manufacturing based on big data will lead to the revolution of traditional industry.

## 2021007SmartFactory-Towards-a-factory-of-things.md

### Abstract

In 1991, Mark Weiser described the vision of a future world under the name of Ubiquitous Computing. Since then, many details of the described vision have become reality: Our mobile phones are powerful multimedia systems, our cars computer systems on wheels, and our homes are turning into smart living environments. All these advances must be turned into products for very cost-sensitive world markets in shorter cycles than ever before.

Today, the resulting requirements for design, setup, and operation of our factories become crucial for success. In the past, we often increased the complexity in structures and control systems, resulting in inﬂexible monolithic production systems. But the future must become lean — not only in organization, but also in planning and technology! We must develop technologies which allow us to speed up planning and setup, to adapt to rapid product changes during operation, and to reduce the planning effort. To meet these challenges we should also make use of the smart technologies of our daily lives. But for industrial use, there are many open questions to be answered. The existing technologies may be acceptable for consumer use but not yet for industrial applications with high safety and security requirements.

Therefore, the SmartFactory KL initiative was founded by industrial and academic partners to create and operate a demonstration and research test bed for future factory technologies. Many projects develop, test, and evaluate new solutions. This presentation describes changes and challenges, and it summarizes the experience gained to date in the SmartFactoryKL .

2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

### 01. Todays world of technology

Mark Weiser, one of the pioneers in computer technology, has coined the term ubiquitous computing — often also referred to as pervasive computing or ambient intelligence — for this new world Ubiquitous computing names the third wave in computing, just now beginning. First were mainframes, each shared by lots of people. Now we are in the personal computing era, person and machine staring uneasily at each other across the desktop. Next comes ubiquitous computing, or the age of calm technology, when technology recedes into the background of our lives (Weiser, 1991). 

In reality today, we are still quite a distance away from this vision. We focus too much on the technology and hope to attain a market advantage by combining a greater number of functionalities in each single device. Unfortunately, this「Swiss army knife」strategy leads to products that customers are unable to master. The manufacturers also encounter a growing number of problems: The cost efficient production with suitable quality requirements becomes proble matic when products with increasingly short life cycles shall be equipped with an ever growing number of options (Zuehlke, 2004).

The production plants also become ever more complex despite all efforts at improving this situation. This in turn, results in longer planning phases and unacceptably long times-to-market. At this point, let's look back to 20 years ago. In the 1980s, we witnessed the first wave of integration of IT technologies into the factories computer integrated manufacturing (CIM), as it was called then The hope was that fully automated plants would solve cost and quality problems on the basis of state-of-the-art computer technology. Since humans would no longer fit in there, the visions of the future then aimed at deserted factories with no human workers. The reality arrived quite differently than imagined. These CIM systems were extremely complex in planning as well as in construction, operation, and maintenance. The technologies were not yet mature and the humans were overstrained. At the beginning of the 90's, when the crisis was obvious, a milestone was represented by the popular book by Womack, Jones and Roos: The Machine That Changed the World: The Story of Lean Production  (Womack, Jones, Roos, 1991), Which explained to the high-tech addicts in the western industry, how Toyota was able to build high quality automobiles with very simple production principles. These principles were known from then on as lean production, which became the paradigm of the beginning decade.

1-2『已下载书籍「2021059The-Machine-That-Changed-the-World」。Lean Production 做一张术语卡片。（2021-01-28）』——已完成

Lean production meant networks, not hierarchies; dynamic, self-coordinating work teams instead of monotonous assembly line jobs; and, most importantly, the personal responsibility of the individual worker. But this philosophy is directed primarily on the organization and less on the technologies.

An earlier version of this article was presented as a keynote paper at the 13th IFAC Symposium on Information Control Problems in Manufacturing (INCOM 09) Moscow. Russia.3-5 une 2009

German Research Center for Artificial Intelligence DFKI/Kaiserslautern Germany.

#### 1.1. Where are we today?

Today, computer integrated manufacturing is a reality, but we are still wrestling with the challenges of extreme complexity in planning and operations. Our planning processes are just as before: too sequential, too comprehensive in content, too much hardware-oriented and too product-speciﬁc. At the same time, we are facing new challenges: our products need to be more individualized and be offered in more variants, they must be adjusted to the market requirements in shorter time, the product life cycles are shorter than ever before and the global competition ever stronger. But deﬁnitely we can rely on the old remedy:「Don’t make things fat, think lean!」Create and use lean technologies now as you created a lean organization then! Lean means reducing complexity, avoiding waste technologies and information and strictly supporting the humans in their daily work. Here, we have the help of many new smart technologies that we take for granted in our daily lives which, in the meantime, have reached a level of maturity that makes them useful under industrial constraints.

1-2『上面对传统工厂弊端做的阐述真好，简单易懂。大大加深了之前看的 Paper「2021005Implementing-Smart-Factory-of-Industrie-4.0-An-Outlook.md」里，对传统单一产品、智慧工厂多功能产品的比较。（2021-01-28）』

Think about a service task in a huge manufacturing plant: A valve does not work properly leading to an overheat situation in the system. Today, the resulting alarm can be directed to the service staff via the mobile phone system anywhere, their smartphones will then guide them via GPS or equivalent indoor location systems very quickly to the place of malfunction. Their portable PC-systems will identify the broken valve e.g. by RFID technology and download all necessary information on this valve and possible replacements instantly via wireless communication channels like WLAN. The service staff can make photos with their smartphones and send them to a spare part shop for better identiﬁcation. And ﬁnally, after a successful repair the crew can check the successful system restart even while having a snack in the cafeteria using their powerful mobile devices.

Isn't that a desirable vision of the future? Without doubt, there have been great advances since 1991 that can help us come closer to realizing the goal of lean technologies. Since some years a new vision has been created: the Internet of Things. The IoT will likely be a non-deterministic and open network in which auto-organized intelligent entities (e.g. Web services) and virtual objects will be interoperable and able to act independently pursuing their own objectives (or shared ones) depending on the context, circumstances or environments. But to make this vision turn into reality several prerequisites must ﬁrst be met.

1『这里看到 on the context 突然领悟到时「上下文」的意思。设备的「自组织」体现在可以根据上下文自己做决定。（2021-01-28）』

#### 1.2. Smart devices

Everything, down to the smallest piece of equipment, must have a certain degree of built-in intelligence. We see RFID technology here as a pioneer. A highly integrated, low-power and low-cost processor is extended with a memory and a wireless communications interface and afﬁxed to each component in a mass market. In effect, the「intelligence」of a central system is moved into every piece of equipment. Products know their histories and their routes, and thereby not only greatly simplify the logistic chain but also form the basis for product life cycle data memories. When this technology is mastered and can be manufactured for just a few cents, the next step will be to couple sensors and actuators on the chip and turn it into an autonomous actuator-sensor network.

3『维基百科里的 RFID：射频识别是一种无线通信技术，可以通过无线电信号识别特定目标并读写相关数据，而无需识别系统与特定目标之间建立机械或者光学接触。无线电的信号是通过调成无线电频率的电磁场，把数据从附着在物品上的标签上传送出去，以自动辨识与追踪该物品。』

1『看到了这里突然想到了「网络科学」，如果人类已经把网络科学吃透了，每个设备变成简单的「小脑」，组合起来可以形成一个自组织的复杂网络。正好「复杂」那本书里有对「复杂系统」的定义，智慧工厂搞不好就可以做成一个复杂系统。这个观点放在「未来工厂」头脑风暴的最后一页 PPT，顺便把几个典型的复杂系统图片放上去，冲击力还是有的，比如蚁群、经济体、食物链等。（2021-01-28）』

#### 1.3. Networked systems

Due to their communication capability these smart devices must form networks which allow them to set up and maintain a very reliable communication infrastructure. Based on the Internet Protocol (IP) these networks will be highly redundant and therefore reliable. Every single piece has an IP address and can communicate. But with today's standards we will reach the technical limits soon. The IP address space must be enlarged. The IPv4 standard could hardly supply enough addresses for today's technology, but IPv6 will bring us relief and even far more: IPv6 will provide each of us roughly 60 thousand trillion addresses (Garﬁnkel, 2004).

#### 1.4. Mobility of devices

The advances in low-power electronics together with high-resolution LCD screens and the wireless communication capabilities will bring mobility forward. Our mobile phones will become multifunctional and multimodal tools which offer us permanent access to all plant elements. We will be able to work anywhere and anytime using any device we like. But general solutions for this kind of interaction are still far away. The plant IT structures today are mostly strictly centralized (thick servers, thin clients). They require a powerful network infrastructure to route the task data between the devices in real-time and are furthermore too device-dependant. What is needed in the future is device-independent mobility at the task level. We must be able to switch from a laptop to a smartphone instantaneously and to continue our task considering the particular technical features of the device in use. And as future devices will not live for 30 years we must allow for shorter technology updates without requiring reprogramming of the control software. But this will require a standardized task (or service) description on a still to be deﬁned meta level (Satyanarayanan, 2004).

1『 What is needed in the future is device-independent mobility at the task level，看到这句 get 了智慧工厂里，移动设备所需的东西，所有计算都是在云端，移动端的屏幕、手机等只是作为一个显示器。（2021-01-28）』

Another important problem concerns knowledge about the place of interaction. When we operate today’s wire-based systems, the wire installation gives us implicit information about the place of interaction. In nomadic applications we will never know exactly where this place is. The user may be seated in front of the machine as well as in the local tavern. To keep the nomadic devices lean and up-to-date, we cannot store every possible front-end software in the devices; instead we should use the network connection to download an abstract HMI representation depending on the users place and task which will be used to generate a hardware-speciﬁc HMI on the dedicated device. Therefore we need location sensing systems, which can track the nomadic devices precisely also in indoor environments. The initial positioning solutions that are already available on the market still lack a broad coverage of industrial requirements. Furthermore, they are not standardized in terms of the required hard- and software interfaces, which makes their integration in large company-wide installations a non futureproof decision.

#### 1.5. Standards must emerge

Fig. 1. ISA-95 models.

As indicated above, industrial solutions for many of the described applications will only be successful when they are based on vendor-independent open standards in order to keep cost and development effort low and guarantee for high availability and reliability during their lifetime. But many of today’s standards, e.g. in wireless networking are often lacking regulations which are essential for process control applications. Therefore, in the ﬁrst phase of industrial applications vendors are forced to develop their own extensions. But in the next phase, appropriate general solutions are likely to follow. A good example is wireless HART, which emerged from analog wire-based (4–20 mA) via digital extensions to today’s wireless standard and is widely accepted as well by users as by vendors.

In addition to the hard-/software and communication standards for devices we also need design standards, e.g. for model representation which are needed to link the various planning systems (CAD, VR, CAE, CAM, etc.) in order to achieve a seamless planning, design and operation environment based on device, process, communication and HMI models. Here the evolving ISA95 standard (Fig. 1) seems to cover major requirements on the higher levels, while EDDL (Electronic Device Description Language) will bring solutions to the lower device levels.

1『直接上图 1 表达的信息很重要，有点类似于智慧工厂里的领域模型。（2021-01-28）』

However, before we can employ these technologies in our operations, we must be able to certify their reliability and safety under industrial conditions. No user will substitute the well-established control cables by a wireless connection unless he is convinced of their safety and security — no user replaces a machine panel by smartphone services as long as nothing works anymore when the smartphone is replaced by a newer device. For this reason, it makes great sense to test these technologies ﬁrst under near-industrial conditions and to develop them further in order to ensure their suitability in industrial environments. It was for this purpose that in Germany for the ﬁrst time in the year 2004, representatives of manufacturers and users met with people from academia and developed a vision for the intelligent factory of the future. This became the basis for the SmartFactory KL in Kaiserslautern, the very ﬁrst multi-vendor research and demonstrator facility for smart production technologies in the world. The next section provides a brief introduction to this facility.

### 02. The SmartFactory KL approach

Based on a feasibility study, a non-proﬁt registered association named「Technology Initiative SmartFactoryKL」was established in June 2005. The founding partners represented various sectors of economy and research. Their common goals were the development, application, and distribution of innovative, industrial plant technologies and to create the foundation for their widespread use in research and practice. The partner circle has since grown to 21 and includes producers and users of factory equipment as well as universities and research centers. Support is also provided by industry and political organizations (Fig. 2).

Fig. 2. Partners of the SmartFactoryKL .

1『发现我们化工行业里的巨头，比如巴斯夫、拜耳、西门子等。（2021-01-28）』

Funding for the establishment, operation, and expansion of the infrastructure primarily stem from membership fees and donations by members of the initiative. Additional funding was provided during the build-up phase by the Minister of Economics and Science of the State of Rhineland-Palatinate. Beyond this, there are many R&D projects that are funded solely by the participating industrial partners as pure research projects or as sponsored joint projects. These projects beneﬁt from the use of the SmartFactoryKL infrastructure and contribute to its upkeep as well as expansion.

In a series of workshops the intentions and research focus of the members are regularly solicited so that new work groups can form and devote their efforts to current topics of interest. The group activities and the moderation of meetings are coordinated by a core team from the SmartFactory KL to ensure that the synergies between development subjects and research projects are realized for all participants. This continuously leads to new approaches for projects to be pursued internally by the partnership circle or to serve as the basis for requesting public funding for research grants. The initiative lives to this extent from the active participation and contributions of all members in joint research and development projects. In the process, the circle is always open to new partners, who bring in innovative products, projects, or ideas and have a desire to actively join in the work on further developing the platform. A framework of information forums introduces interested companies to well-known representatives of research and business who present the current state-of-the-art and invite an exchange of ideas about trends and smarter technologies. Furthermore, SmartFactory KL regularly presents itself to the public at major industry events, like well-known trade fairs or industry meetings.

The equipment basis for the SmartFactory KL is a hybrid production facility for the production of colored liquid soap. The product is mixed, ﬁlled into dispenser bottles, individually labeled, and then delivered by customer order. The plant has been designed strictly modular and it consists as well of a process manufacturing part as of a piece goods handling part. The machinery and components are identical to those found in modern industrial plants and stem from various manufacturers so that the result is a multi-vendor production and handling facility available for research purposes, absolutely comparable in its complexity with real manufacturing plants (Figs. 3 and 4).

Fig. 3. Photo of the SmartFactory KL facility.

Fig. 4. Floorplan of the SmartFactoryKL .

The research focuses clearly on the use of innovative information and communication technologies in automated systems and on the resulting challenges in the design of such systems. Several different wireless communications systems are employed in the demonstration facility (Fig. 5). As a consequence, a permanent WLAN connection has been implemented for the decentralized control systems of the components in the piece goods part to the higher level control center. Bluetooth, ZigBee, UWB, NFC and RFID systems are deployed among the components, which serve as an extended link at the sensor/actuator level. The wireless communication guarantees new freedoms in plant layout and reduces the planning effort in that cabling is no longer required. However, the robustness of the radio communications in such a heterogeneous environment must always be proven. In this demo plant several monitoring devices are installed to monitor the frequency bands and the quality of service in data transmission. On the other hand, various sources for interference are used to check the electromagnetic compatibility of the systems.

1『有启发的：Bluetooth, ZigBee, UWB, NFC and RFID systems are deployed among the components, which serve as an extended link at the sensor/actuator level，蓝牙、RFID 这些可以为整个无线局域网做补充，当然，主要还是通过 5G 实现。（2021-01-28）』

The wireless communication in combination with the modular construction allows the facility to operate according to the「plug'n work」principle. Every element takes on a clear, well-deﬁned function within the process chain. Because no physical connections exist between the components other than the power supply, it is relatively simple to replace or add individual components for a modiﬁcation or extension of the production processes. The components recognize their function and position themselves within the process chain and integrate automatically into the control systems for plant management. The conﬁguration of the information ﬂow becomes ever simpler because the components identify their tasks from the manufacturing situation and attune themselves to the surrounding components.

1『这里 get 到一个很重要的点：因为无线连接设备了，可以理解把部分的「硬连接」转化为「软连接」，这样的话我改生产线只需要改算法逻辑，仪表桥架不需要重新连了，灵活性大大提高。所以也就理解了之前多篇 Paper 里提到的，设备管道连接可能会冗余一些，这是为多变的生产创造条件的。醍醐灌顶的感觉。（2021-01-29）』

The logical continuation of the「plug'n work」principle is the transition from traditional function-oriented to service-oriented control architectures (SoA). The SmartFactory KL has experimentally converted a sub-area of the plant control to SoA architecture (see Fig. 5). The purpose of this was to gain experience in the handling of this new architecture for industrial control processes. The present system is based on a Business to Manufacturing Markup Language (B2MML) model according to ISA-95, a Web Services Description Language (WSDL) model, as well as the Business Process Execution Language (BPEL) for system administration. While this test case revealed the fundamental advantages of a SoA architecture, it also clearly shows the far ranging effects of this paradigm change on the overall information structure of a company.

Fig. 5. Experimental SOA architecture of the SmartFactoryKL .

Using radio technologies it is also possible to employ new, mobile and ﬂexible systems for the operation, maintenance, and diagnostics of the production facility. Today, most sensors and actuators as well as more complex mechatronic units are equipped with stationary, inﬂexible control panels that range from those with just a few buttons and lights to those with complete PC-based, color LCD panels. Due to the lack of standards and the increasing range of functionalities, the complexity of these device operating systems is rapidly growing, a fact which not only leads to higher costs but also to problems in familiarization training and maintenance service. One solution to this problem is the physical separation of the devices and the control panels. Radio technologies enable standard control devices such as PDA's or mobile telephones to access different suppliers' ﬁeld devices. A widely standard, consistent control concept raises the learning conduciveness of such systems and prevents operational errors. Location independence and the advanced display and interactive possibilities enable a signiﬁcant increase in the ﬂexibility of device operations (Fig. 6).

2『关键信息：One solution to this problem is the physical separation of the devices and the control panels，这里涉及到自控的知识，目前不是很明白。（2021-01-28）』

Fig. 6. Wireless technologies in the SmartFactoryKL .

The integration of location sensing systems with production and logistic processes is a major condition for meeting the demands for greater ﬂexibility and shorter production cycles. The effective use of location data allows for ﬂexible context-related applications and location-based services. Various positioning systems are deployed at the demonstration facility of the SmartFactoryKL . For example, the ﬂoor is ﬁtted with a grid of RFID tags. These tags can be read by mobile units to determine location data. Other systems for three-dimensional positioning based on ultrasonic as well as RF technologies are also installed and currently tested, especially in terms of the accuracy achievable under industrial conditions.

The installed systems cover the full range of components within the automation pyramid (Fig. 7): from ﬁeld devices (sensors/ actuators) and programmable logic controllers (PLC) through process management and manufacturing execution systems (MES) to the enterprise level (ERP) software, the entire spectrum of control technologies for industrial manufacturing is represented in the SmartFactoryKL .

Fig. 7. Automation pyramid.

The platform offered by the SmartFactory KL served as a research and development basis in numerous projects with various partners. For example, a demonstrator has been developed, that shows the usability of commercial mobile telephones for radiobased parameterization of components (Goerlich, Stephan, & Quadﬂieg, 2007). Using Java software, which runs on the mobile phones of several different brands, it is possible to monitor and conﬁgure a multitude of ﬁeld devices in the SmartFactoryKL. The available devices and wireless links are automatically identiﬁed. Furthermore, a uniform operating philosophy facilitates handling of ﬁeld devices and enables access to any device from any location on the shop ﬂoor, thereby speeding up parameterization, diagnostics, and control of ﬁeld devices. Rapid switching from one device to another is possible without changing location.

In a government funded project, a very basic and general method for the description of human-machine interactions in an abstract and hardware-independent way is currently being developed. An early prototype already builds fully functional remote control software from communication models and use models, and provides a simple, context-adaptive user interfaces. This is a prerequisite for decoupling HMI engineering from hardware design, respectively the actual hardware used.

A digital record of the life cycle of high value products, continuous monitoring of a product's status, product location tracking as well as ubiquitous access to all relevant product data are topics of increasing importance to manufacturing and trade companies. In a government funded research project named「SemProM」(Semantic Product Memory), an innovative, basic concept for a digital product memory has been developed and implemented at the SmartFactoryKL . As a visionary technology of the future, it is based on the next generation of mobile, embedded, and radio-based elements for semantic communication between everyday objects. The goal is to develop「intelligent」products, with capabilities far beyond the pure identiﬁcation function of today’s RFID features. Besides the evaluation of the various embedded sensors (e.g., temperature, brightness, humidity, speed, acceleration, location), they record all relevant product and operating data and, in the sense of an Internet of things, exchange this information with other products, with their surroundings, and even with their users.

In cooperation with the partner SAP-Research the SmartFactory KL has been linked into the SAP Future Factory network. By this experiences were gained on the integration into production networks on the MES level. A production order can be started anywhere in the network, the production remotely controlled and the products routed to other manufacturing plants or the customer.

### 03. Towards a factory-of-things

Despite the success stories already discussed, it is still a long and winding road from the vision to the reality of a smart factory, but just as it is constantly being walked by the consumer product engineers, it must also be taken by the factory planners. Adopting the basic principles of the internet-of-things we should talk about a factory-of-things as a vision for our future factories. The factory-of-things will be composed of smart objects which interact based on semantic services. There will be no hierarchy in the traditional sense instead the objects will self-organize to fulﬁl a certain task. But to achieve this goal there are multi-dimensional problems to be solved.

1『 There will be no hierarchy in the traditional sense instead the objects will self-organize to fulﬁl a certain task，这句话是对「智慧工厂」一个核心的解释。补充进主题卡片「智慧工厂的 autonomy and sociality」里。（2021-01-28）』——已完成

#### 3.1. The technical dimension

The technical dimension most likely poses the least difﬁcult challenges. Here, smart devices suitable for industrial use are to be developed. For reasons of economy they will likely be based to a great extent on the technologies from the world of consumer goods. For example, just as it took many years for the PC to become suitable for industrial purposes, so too will smartphones, wireless PLC’s or sensors make the jump. In the process, we should always strive to use the existing standards from the world of the consumer market whenever possible, for that is where the high production volumes are which lead to acceptable prices. But these standards also need to be adjusted to the conditions of the industry with regard to reliability and the different environmental conditions.

A typical change will affect our operating devices. The upcoming use of the various wireless technologies will bring mobility to the worker. The use of nomadic operating devices is also far more than just a substitution for the ﬁxed installation of control panels. One problem here is the variety of different devices, which are also designed with signiﬁcantly shorter life cycles as the rest of the plant. Additionally, there is the problem of user permissions and identity management, which must ensure that only authorized users can access a certain device within the plant. And, as device tracking enables permanent monitoring of the user, there are privacy issues of data protection to be clariﬁed prior to use.

For making a factory-of-things work all elements must become smart, i.e. they must offer a thin web server functionality to act as a service provider in a factory network. To let a simple inductive proximity sensor become smart in that sense may look totally excessive from today’s point of view. But in 5 or 10 years the advances in microelectronics will surely bring it close to reality. And the emerging IPv6 standard will offer enough addresses to give each grain of sand on the entire earth more than just one.

#### 3.2. The architectural dimension

Many of the envisioned changes can only develop their maximum beneﬁt when we move to a more abstract description of the planning and control process. We must avoid to link hardware, software and architecture at early stages already. Instead, we must concentrate on architectures enabling interoperability based on abstract component and task models. From similar developments in software engineering we learned that we must proceed from electrical signals via simple data integration to system models based on abstract objects. With the increased use of OPC, CORBA, etc. we moved into the right direction. But as in modern software engineering we have to proceed to the semantic level e.g. by using service architectures based on commonly deﬁned process services. But this next step will be much more challenging than any other leap in the past (Vernadat, 2006).

The new service-oriented architecture (SoA) paradigm will not only bring substantial advantages to the design of complex systems but will completely shake up many traditional design processes. SoA is a powerful decentralized architecture that relies on company-wide task and service models. The services themselves are encapsulated and retrieved over a standard interface. The various levels of aggregation must ﬁrst be identiﬁed and deﬁned for such services. What makes the implementation so difﬁcult is that initially the company-wide services must be deﬁned semantically, and then step by step reﬁned down to the unit level. Additionally, the SoA architecture is not a hierarchical structure as is typical for plant construction today; rather it is a loosely linked distributed network architecture. This implies a need for new engineering methods and tools to be satisﬁed before any employment in an industrial setting can be considered promising. And perhaps most challenging, the experienced factory planners trained in hierarchical thinking over decades must learn a new thinking: to compose complex technical systems of abstract services based on common ontologies (see Fig. 8). Another important factor is the trust of the customers in such new control architectures. SoA as a loosely coupled service network will surely not fulﬁl today’s typical requirements concerning real-time behavior and predictability. But this was also true for the Ethernet when it was ﬁrst promoted for industrial use.

1『多次看到语义性逻辑 Semantically，目前还不是很明白，感觉与根据「上下文」自行调整同义。（2021-01-29）』

As customers in this ﬁeld are not looking for revolutions but instead for a continuous evolution with predictable behavior and steady improvements the factory-of-things paradigm will be hard to promote in complete. It will surely not replace the old structures with lots of experiences over decades in just one night. But the advantages will drive the SoA application downwards from the ERP level – where it is used today already to a large extend – to the MES and Device level. Most likely, a good intermediate interface between the different architectures can be realized at the PLC level. A future PLC may look as a complex service object to the upper MES level and interpret the service requests to the lower device levels still based on the traditional hierarchical bits and bytes paradigm.

1『这里的 PLC 层如同图 7 金字塔控制层里的 Control-Level（Machine controllers）。（2021-01-29）』

#### 3.3. The planning dimension

A large portion of the problems in plant engineering has their origin in the planning methods commonly used today, which are closely associated with hardware factors. As a rule, today’s planning procedures normally start with an initial, top-down rough planning in which the structures, components and production methods and parameters of the product are deﬁned. Thereafter, the bottom-up detailed planning begins, in which the required machine parts and components are selected and engineered, wiring schemes planned in detail, and ﬁnally, the control hardware and software is developed. Today there are many advanced CAx systems used for this. With CAD, for example, STEP models can import and integrate mechanical data; CAE tools for SCADA development like PCS7/WinCC (Siemens) facilitate the design of control software, and visualization (or simulation) tools allow for the simulation of the entire plant already in early design planning stages. Unfortunately, these systems often lack adequate data integration: Although they are internally model-based, the models are often incompatible with one another. It is precisely this model-based integration that takes on increased signiﬁcance in the lean planning process of the future. Here, solutions are most urgently needed to create an improved planning situation. Modelbased planning needs device models on the basic levels. Today, most industrial devices are already delivered to the customer with electronic CAD and product data in the international STEP format. In the future, this data must be transformed into comprehensive device models including communication and service models (Fig. 9).

The vision for future factory planning is named「Digital Factory」. The importance of this ﬁeld is pointed out by the fact that several big players from the industry equipment market merged with IT-companies in order to offer comprehensive system development, planning and control tools. These tools will integrate planning, simulation, operation and even MES and ERP functions supporting the complete product lifecycle. This will require consistent and comprehensive system models which will be the most crucial point for success.

In the long run, we aim at a semantic interoperability of the various factory devices. This requires semantic service models based on common ontologies and – for a world-wide market success – international standards.

#### 3.4. The safety and security dimension

The daily frustration of having an empty battery for your mobile phone or having a virus sneak onto your PC is certainly annoying, but very seldom threatening. This is quite different for an industrial application. There, we must be able to ensure under nearly every normal condition, that the systems stay constantly under control. Today, while wired controls can provide a satisfactory safety guarantee, there are still many open questions concerning the mobile and wireless solutions. It is not only the technical issues like the power supply or the availability of channels that can present problems; there is also the risk of criminal attacks – the tiresome hackers – that not only cause severe problems but will be much harder to be traced. In our SmartFactory KL a simple wireless webcam set was sufﬁcient to widely jam all wireless communication and thereby stop production.

Another problem area is fast approaching and with it come challenges we will be confronted with in the near future: As more and more devices are becoming smart and equipped with wireless communication interfaces, the frequency bands allocated for this purpose will quickly reach their capacity limits. Already today, e.g. at industry trade fairs, the WLAN links often break down, simply because there are too many users in a relatively small, enclosed area. New access protocols can certainly lead to a far better use of the frequency bands, but for the long term, there will be the need to release additional radio bands.

In spite of such problems, the ﬁrst wireless systems are now being sold by several of the large vendors in the ﬁeld of process automation. However, these are still custom solutions, which serve mainly to gather experience and test the market. Most customers have not yet been convinced of these systems’ safety and security. But just as it took years for the PC to overcome the skepticism of industry as a reliable control component, the wireless systems will need a bit more time before they can assert themselves (Welander, 2007).

#### 3.5. The human dimension

Finally, we should not forget the lessons learned from the CIM era. Whatever technical system we design, we always should put the human in the center! The factory devoid of humans is an aberration. We need humans in all phases of factory operations from the planning through the operation to the maintenance and repair services. While our human cognitive and sensomotor abilities have not signiﬁcantly improved within the last thousands of years, future systems should focus on humans and their abilities and not conversely demand that the humans adjust to whatever technology.

The new technological possibilities will further provide a level of mobility for humans which has never been reached before. The place of work will be increasingly decoupled from the physical location of the worker. The wireless communication technologies make it a reality to remotely perform portions of the plant monitoring and operating functions, for example, from the cafeteria or even the sidewalk cafe. This brings up not only issues of job security but also of the boundaries between work and leisure and certainly even the monetary compensation models.

As we have learned from today’s smartphones, the short life cycles of such operating devices in comparison to the long life cycles of the production equipment require an independency of the HMI software from the hardware. This can only be achieved by replacing the device-dependant HMI software by abstract HMI models to describe the interaction independent from the actual hardware realization. Such models will have to be developed and then implemented in appropriate engineering tools. This will ﬁt perfectly into SoA architectures, as abstract HMI models itself are mostly composed of services.

Taking all this into consideration, the engineering of the HMI takes on a whole new signiﬁcance. We are following the path we already walked long ago in the development of hardware and especially software: namely, from the direct design or programming to abstract engineering methods. In current software engineering, we are able to model systems using abstract, object-oriented methods. Similarly, we must now develop Useware 1 engineering methods that describe the interaction in abstract, object-oriented ways (Fig. 10, Zuehlke, 2007).

[1] USEWARE comprises all hard- and software components of a technical system that are related to human-machine-interaction, the term USEWARE was introduced in 1999 to emphasize the independent signiﬁcance of HMI design compared to the traditional ﬁelds of hard- and software.

### 04. Conclusions

Today we are in a comparable situation to 29 years ago. New ICT technologies and products offer a broad range of new applications not only in the consumer but also the industrial world. A simple adaptation of existing technologies from the area of consumer goods appears tempting but, this would be inappropriate for industrial use in most cases. Instead, we should remember the lessons learned from the CIM crisis:

1 reduce complexity by strict modularization and lean technologies,

2 avoid centralized hierarchies in favor of loosely linked decentralized structures consisting of self-adapting modules,

3 allow for self-organization on the system level wherever possible,  allow for a really concurrent engineering by decoupling process, mechanical, electrical, and control design on the basis of semantic models,

4 create and apply standards to all levels of the automation pyramid in order to reduce planning effort and allow re-use of components, 

5 and in the end: develop technologies for the human. A deserted factory is an aberration!

The path we have taken in Germany with the SmartFactoryKL initiative, to examine, test and develop technologies in a physical factory test bed in cooperation of industry and academia, has proven itself so that we can recommend it for imitation elsewhere. However, the resources required are not to be underestimated. And as future changes will not only require steady technical evolution but instead the acceptance of new engineering paradigms we need visions and visionary decision makers in industry, politics and academia (Zuehlke, 2008).

## 2021008Smart-Factory-A-Step-towards-the-Next-Generation-of-Manufacturing.md

January 1, 2008

### Abstract

The Stuttgart Model of adaptive, transformable and virtual factories, already implemented in German basic research performed at the Universität Stuttgart has been extended with a new perspective, the so-called「Smart Factory」. The Smart Factory approach is a new dimension of multi-scale manufacturing by using the state-of-the-art ubiquitous/pervasive computing technologies and tools. The Smart Factory represents a context-sensitive manufacturing environment that can handle turbulences in real-time production using decentralized information and communication structures for an optimum management of production processes. This paper presents our research steps and future work in giving reality to the envisioned Smart Factory at the Universität Stuttgart.

Keywords: Smart Factory; Real-time Factory; Ubiquitous computing

1『这里出现了一个关键词「real-time production」。（2021-01-27）』

### 01. Problem Statement

In recent years manufacturing engineering experienced a dramatic change through different parallel running developments. The globalisation and the wish to produce highly customized products lead to a higher proliferation of variants, shorter product life cycles and closer enterprise networks. The short planning horizons and product life cycles induce the decrease of batch sizes and do therefore require a high dimension of manufacturing flexibility. In order to make the right management decisions, real-time information and the direct realisation of the decisions are indispensable.

Dynamical changes in the factory, caused through internal or external turbulences like a machine breakdown or an order fluctuation in the market, can often not be taken into account and therefore lead to false decisions on different planning levels. Due to complex interactions of the different functions and departments of the factory and their task-oriented specific data formats, the causes of the dynamic changes exponentiate themselves and their consequences for the factory as well. Thus, high flexibility demands are posed to the manufacturing resources, their planning and control [1].

The management control of the complex processes inside and outside of the factory is even today performed through Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) and Manufacturing Execution Systems (MES) and applications. The increased market turbulences and therefore increased flexibility of manufacturing require complex manufacturing sequences, which are difficult to realise with the today’s solutions. Outdated information in the different information systems are leading directly to problems in planning and production.

The information management is responsible for the allocation of the job and process specific information like NC programs or machine properties, however the material management is responsible for the supply of components. Tool and device systems are additional mobile manufacturing resources to conduct a manufacturing process. The coordination of many heterogeneous subsystems providing all required resources, materials and information at the work place is necessary to ensure a constant resource load. To achieve this synchronization, many different specialized software systems and applications are used, like resource management systems, MES or ERP systems. Any failure in a subsystem would result in a significant reduction of the productivity of the whole system. While a MES plans and controls the manufacturing level, the ERP level plans and controls the synchronization of the subsidiary planning entities. Even the smallest difference between the real and digital saved data, e.g. initiated by a malfunction, leads to planning discrepancies and a miscalculation of the optimal working point.

A parallel development was enabled by the integration of electronic components like microchips or sensors into objects due to their decline of price. This development enables a decentralized control in a more economical way.

### 02. Smart Factory: Definition, Challenges and Enabling Technologies

The design and development of the Smart Factory require as a first step the definition of the concept. Mark Weiser’s vision of the smart environment describes a physical world, which is closely and invisibly interwoven with sensors, actuators, displays and computer elements, which are seamlessly embedded into daily life objects. They are connected with each other by a network [2]. The Mark Weiser’s approach of smart environments is transferred to manufacturing issues. After the development of digital and virtual factories next step in evolution of factories is the fusion of physical and virtual world [3] under a so-called Smart Factory.

#### 2.1 Definition

The basic research in the field of Smart Factory at Institute of Industrial Manufacturing and Management (IFF) is performed within the Center of Excellence Nexus (SFB 627) [4]. This interdisciplinary research is funded by the German Research Foundation (DFG). The so-called Smart Factory is defined as a Factory that context-aware assists people and machines in execution of their tasks. This is achieved by systems working in background, so-called Calm-systems and context-aware applications. In our case, context-aware means that the systems can take into consideration context information like the position and status of an object. These systems accomplish their tasks based on information coming from physical and virtual world. Information of the physical world is e.g. position or condition of a tool, in contrast to information of the virtual world like electronic documents, drawings and simulation models. These systems are working on different levels of the factory, like context-aware information systems in the shop floor (workers cockpit) or advanced manufacturing execution systems that can act context-aware for the shop floor manager. Calm systems are referring in this context the hardware of a Smart Factory. The main difference between calm and other types of systems is the ability to communicate and interact with its environment.

#### 2.2 Challenges

The Smart Factory concept enables the real-time collection, distribution and access of manufacturing relevant information anytime and anywhere. The Smart Factory represents a realtime, context-sensitive manufacturing environment that can handle turbulences in production using decentralized information and communication structures for an optimum management of production processes. Premises for further assistance than today are the horizontal and vertical integration of information systems, the assignment of material and flow of information within an enterprise. For acting context-aware, the applications in the Smart factory have to answer the following three questions, from those deriving more challenges:

1 How is an object identified? => Identification phase

2 Where is an object located into the factory? => Positioning phase

3 What is the situation or status of an object? => Status knowledge

2『感觉这的信息就是论文的核心，智慧工厂要回答的三个问题，做一张主题卡片。（2021-01-28）』

These and further challenges are shortly presented:

Identification: The Identification of objects, as one of the basic challenges in a factory, assigns information of the virtual world like process steps to real world objects. Therefore suitable identification methods, tags, sensors, sensor readers and communication facilities have to be found and chosen, specific to their task in a rough industrial environment.

Localization: For improving the processes and reducing idle times within the Smart Factory the localization is required to have an actual knowledge about the position of the objects like tools or materials. Depending on the purpose, the accuracy of a positioning system has to be a range within 0.15-1m. Furthermore a positioning system used in a manufacturing environment has to work on a large scale and has to be robust against environmental influences, electromagnetic fields, noise of dust, etc. [3].

Status knowledge: The assistance systems in a Smart Factory have to know the status or situation of the objects in order to provide users the context-aware information.

Update of smart management systems: Current object information like the status or location has to be communicated to the systems of the Smart Factory. As an example the highly dynamical data like the position of an object should be updated every 10 to 30 seconds [3].

Support for different queries: Assistance systems in the Smart Factory have to support different kinds of queries [3]. We can differentiate into object-based, location-based/spatial, temporal and combinations of the previous types of queries.

Integration of heterogeneous information: The integration challenge of different systems in an enterprise is caused by different information models, interfaces and data formats. In order to provide other systems easy accessible information, different systems have to be integrated into a common synchronizing platform.

Real-time characterized reaction: For supporting people and machines information has to be provided within seconds. This challenge addresses mainly communications technologies and database management.

#### 2.3 Enabling Technologies

Figure 1: Smart Factory

The implementation of the Smart Factory is enabled by several technologies, in the following shortly presented (Figure 1). An application of the Smart Factory consists of a Calm-system (referring more to hardware components) and a context-aware application (referring more to software components).

Embedded Systems: To provide small computing power for decentralized intelligent functions, microcontrollers have been developed in the last few years. They are optimized to low energy consumption for working in mobile devices. Today a wide range of「easy-to-use」microcontrollers are on the market with different computing power ranges, like the AVR or Pic microcontroller or the Xscale processors families.

(Wireless) Communication Technology: Calm systems have the ability to communicate with its environment. Today low mobile resources like a milling machine have got built in LAN or Fieldbus technology to communicate with higher-level enterprise systems like a MES. Recent developments tend to use wireless data transfers for low mobile resources as well as for mobile objects like tools or materials. These technologies are enabling ad-hoc networking of two or more devices and are usually classified after their cover range. Telecommunications technologies for second (e.g. EDGE/GPRS) and third generation (e.g. UMTS) cell phones and WiMAX/WiBro cover long distances up to several kilometers, whereas for short distances e.g. in a factory building, Wireless-LAN, Bluetooth/WIBREE and ZIGBEE are used.

Automatic Identification (Auto-ID) Technologies: Automatic identification technologies are other essential technologies for a Smart Factory for assigning virtual data to real objects, especially Barcode and RFID (Radio Frequency Identification) technologies are important for manufacturing purposes. The advantages of RFID compared to Barcodetechnology are its non-contact, non-line-of-sight nature, the possibilities to store more than just a number and integrating additional sensors e.g. for temperature and humidity. But barcodes are still wide spread in industry, due to its low costs.

Positioning Technologies: Location information is probably one of the most important factors in ubiquitous computing. Methods like triangulation, scene analysis and proximity are mainly used to determine a position of an object [5].

Federation Platform (Nexus Platform): The federation technology provides an easy access for applications to heterogeneous data. The Nexus Platform is developed within the Center of Excellence Nexus (SFB 627) provides context-aware’s applications a homogenous interface for querying context information of different heterogeneous databases. The context information is stored the in so-called context servers. Currently two types of context server are existing, one for spatial data and one for highly dynamic location data of objects.

Situation Recognition: In order to provide people in their tasks the right information at the right moment the assistance systems have to know the situation of their users. Therefore situation recognition becomes an important enabling technology for context-aware applications.

Sensor Fusion: Today's applications often use hard coded systems specifically designed for their task, giving no information to other systems. Sensor fusion technology is used in the Smart Factory for combining different raw sensor values for an aggregation or better measurements. Furthermore having all kinds of sensor data easy accessible via the Nexus Platform in the Smart Factory environment new kinds of measurements can be created for an easy implementation of new context-aware applications.

### 03. Positioning of the Smart Factory into the Functional Architecure of a Manufacturing Enterprise

The manufacturing enterprise has to fulfill along its processes several main functions, graphically represented in Figure 2. As shown, the main phases of factory life cycle are investment planning, site and building planning, the planning of infrastructure and processes, layout planning, ramp-up and project management, manufacturing execution, maintenance, education and training. The architecture introduces the complexity of managing the data's diversity and heterogeneity, which comes from different applications and information systems. Due to the real-time informing and controlling character, the Smart Factory focuses mainly the manufacturing execution, maintenance, education and training functions of a manufacturing enterprise, as shown in Figure 2.

Figure 2: Functional architecture of a manufacturing enterprise (PDM: Product Data Management).

But also other functions in a manufacturing enterprise gain advantages from the up-to-date data of the Smart Factory. Especially functions from factory life cycle like the planning of processes and equipment can benefit from the information coming from the Smart Factory.

Opposite to other existing applications, the information of the Smart Factory is context-aware. The Smart Factory has the potential to canalize information overflow and provide people decision support in production activities. With context-aware applications the manufacturing processes can be optimized and times e.g. for tool searching reduced.

As an example, a situation of a maintenance task is shortly presented in the following. The scenario represents a breakdown of a milling machine and shows the advantages of the Smart Factory usage. As a first step the machine is sending an error message after breakdown. With this information the maintenance worker and the shop floor manager are notified. From here the error information will be analyzed and assigned to a suitable workflow. If it is already documented as an error the worker gets the repairing steps and required tools. Furthermore the locations of the tools are available and displayed in the application. Then the worker can order the tools or grab them itself on the way to the machine.

Figure 3: Architecture of the Smart Factory.

Arrived at the machine he can immediately start the repairing So the times of tooling search are minimized. The workflow has to be updated with the time, actions and used tools in order that the repairing knowledge is saved for further usage Furthermore with the time information the MES can reschedule the jobs and minimize the effects of the breakdown.

Figure 3 gives an overview of the envisioned Smart Factory The modules like a MES or a Smart Machine are connected via the Nexus Platform with the Augmented World Model that provides the exchange of sensor, process, job, geometric and further information in the factory. 

### 04. Related Work

In the research field of Smart Factories several other related work, relevant for the scientific community, have to be mentioned. These are in the following shortly presented

Smart Factorvkl: The Smart Factorykl is a project located in Kaiserslautern Germany. Current projects of Smart Factory KL are focused on the development of applications with Indoor Positioning Systems, universal Human Machine Interfaces, web-based information services and the integration of heterogeneous information systems [7].

/NT-MANUS: The Intelligent Networked Manufacturing System (INT MANUS) project is financed by the European Commission under the 6 framework. Goal of INT-MANUS is the development of a new technology, the so called Smart Connected-control Platform (SCC platform) for manufacturing enterprises 8]

### 05. Conclusions and Future Work

The downscaling of computer and sensor technologies supports the integration of knowledge at all scales of a holistic production system, aiming at increasing the transformability of the factory as a whole. The presented Smart Factory approach represents a real-time, context sensitive manufacturing environment that can handle turbulences in production using decentralized information and communication structures for an optimum management of Production processes. Based on the Nexus Platform it integrates heterogeneous information systems in manufacturing enterprise both horizontal (e. G. Between systems in the shop floor) and vertical (e. G. Between shop floor and management systems like ERP or MES) in order to reduce information deficits. In the framework of the research area Smart Factory at the Universitat Stuttgart, IFF, a Smart Factory environment has been developed and will be enhanced, aiming at implementing the vision of the next-generation real-time and context-aware production systems.

2『这里的总结算是本论文精华了，做一张信息数据卡片。（2021-01-28）』——已完成