## 记忆时间

2021-01-30

## 卡片

### 0101. 主题卡 —— 智慧工厂定义

摘自「2021005Implementing-Smart-Factory-of-Industrie-4.0-An-Outlook.md」2016 年 1 月发表的论文

With the emerging information technologies, such as IoT, big data, and cloud computing together with artificial intelligence technologies, we believe the smart factory of Industrie 4.0 can be implemented. The smart machines and products can communicate and negotiate with each other to reconfigure themselves for flexible production of multiple types of products. The massive data can be collected from smart artifacts and transferred to the cloud through the IWN. This enables the system-wide feedback and coordination based on big data analytics to optimize system performance. The above self-organized reconfiguration and big data based feedback and coordination define the framework and operational mechanism of the smart factory.

1-2『

智慧工厂：以物联网（5G）、大数据、云计算为技术支撑；工厂里的物理实体（设备、管道、仪表、原料、产品等）通过物联网连网在线，实时传送大量数据到云端，且各实体之间可以通信和谈判；云端加载不同的算法逻辑，一套装置能灵活的生产不同产品并且同一个产品可用不同的生产线实现；云端以工厂实体的大数据为基础，通过深度学习算法进行系统性反馈和协调，获取当前环境下，安全、高品质、低功耗、环保等多因素的最优操作解。智慧工厂的定义做一张主题卡片。

突然有个想法，在分子层面做文章，比如产品里加入某个分子当作数据标签或者产品里已经存在的某种分子作数据标签。（2021-01-30）

』——已完成

### 0102. 主题卡 —— 智慧工厂的 autonomy and sociality

摘自「2021005Implementing-Smart-Factory-of-Industrie-4.0-An-Outlook.md」2016 年 1 月发表的论文

From the perspective of control engineer, the smart factory can be viewed as a closedloop system, as shown in Figure 3. In the center of the control loop is the network of smart artifacts. The smart artifact has 3C capabilities, and beyond this, it has autonomy and sociality. By autonomy, we mean that the smart artifact makes decisions by itself; no other entities can directly control its behavior. By sociality, we mean that the smart artifacts understand a common set of knowledge and follow a common set of rules for negotiation. Therefore, a society of smart artifacts can yield a highly flexible manufacturing system, that is, a self-organized and reconfigurable system that seems to be humanoid or smart.

1『这里感觉出现了核心的观点，autonomy and sociality，做一张主题卡片。（2021-01-27）』——已完成

The smart artifacts are fundamental components of smart factory. While today’s computer numerical control (CNC) machines generally have 3C capabilities, the smart machines should have additional autonomy and sociality capabilities. This means the smart machines can make decisions by themselves instead of being directly instructed, and they can negotiate with each other and with the smart products. Therefore, the autonomy and sociality capabilities are the key enablers for the implementation of a self-organized manufacturing system. The research on MAS that is a branch of AI technology can provide some useful results such as the ontology method and the contract net protocol (CNP) [28]. However, further research is still needed to achieve the autonomous manufacturing system architecture instead of hierarchical or mediator ones.

2『上面的信息补充进主题卡片「智慧工厂的 autonomy and sociality」里。（2021-01-28）』

摘自「2021007SmartFactory-Towards-a-factory-of-things.md」2010 年 3 月发表的论文

Despite the success stories already discussed, it is still a long and winding road from the vision to the reality of a smart factory, but just as it is constantly being walked by the consumer product engineers, it must also be taken by the factory planners. Adopting the basic principles of the internet-of-things we should talk about a factory-of-things as a vision for our future factories. The factory-of-things will be composed of smart objects which interact based on semantic services. There will be no hierarchy in the traditional sense instead the objects will self-organize to fulﬁl a certain task. But to achieve this goal there are multi-dimensional problems to be solved.

1『 There will be no hierarchy in the traditional sense instead the objects will self-organize to fulﬁl a certain task，这句话是对「智慧工厂」一个核心的解释。补充进主题卡片「智慧工厂的 autonomy and sociality」里。（2021-01-28）』——已完成

摘自「2021006Smart-Factory-of-Industry-4.0-Key-Technologies-Application-Case-and-Challenges.md」2018 年 3 月发表的论文

In the context of Industry 4.0, the intelligent manufacturing attracts enormous interest from government, enterprises and academic researchers [9]. Therefore, the construction patterns of smart factory are widely discussed. However, the standards for smart factory implementation have not been established yet. Benkamoun et al. [10] proposed a class diagram which can be used to represent the manufacturing system from different perspectives of entities and functions. Radziwon et al. [11] expounded former research from the concept of smart factory, and they pointed out that smart factory is actually an exploring of adaptive and ﬂexible manufacturing. Lin et al. [12] proposed an architecture for cloud manufacturing systems oriented to aerospace conglomerate, which facilitates optimal conﬁguration of manufacturing resources. 

1-2『目前个人比较认同 Radziwon et al. [11] 的观点，自适应和灵活性生产。然后发现这篇 Paper 已经下载了「2021011The Smart Factory: Exploring Adaptive and Flexible Manufacturing Solutions」并存入了 Zotero。（2021-01-29）』

### 0103. 主题卡 —— 智慧工厂要回答的三个问题

摘自「2021008Smart-Factory-A-Step-towards-the-Next-Generation-of-Manufacturing.md」2008 年 1 月发表的论文

The Smart Factory concept enables the real-time collection, distribution and access of manufacturing relevant information anytime and anywhere. The Smart Factory represents a realtime, context-sensitive manufacturing environment that can handle turbulences in production using decentralized information and communication structures for an optimum management of production processes. Premises for further assistance than today are the horizontal and vertical integration of information systems, the assignment of material and flow of information within an enterprise. For acting context-aware, the applications in the Smart factory have to answer the following three questions, from those deriving more challenges:

1 How is an object identified? => Identification phase

2 Where is an object located into the factory? => Positioning phase

3 What is the situation or status of an object? => Status knowledge

2『感觉这的信息就是论文的核心，智慧工厂要回答的三个问题，做一张主题卡片。（2021-01-28）』

These and further challenges are shortly presented:

Identification: The Identification of objects, as one of the basic challenges in a factory, assigns information of the virtual world like process steps to real world objects. Therefore suitable identification methods, tags, sensors, sensor readers and communication facilities have to be found and chosen, specific to their task in a rough industrial environment.

Localization: For improving the processes and reducing idle times within the Smart Factory the localization is required to have an actual knowledge about the position of the objects like tools or materials. Depending on the purpose, the accuracy of a positioning system has to be a range within 0.15-1m. Furthermore a positioning system used in a manufacturing environment has to work on a large scale and has to be robust against environmental influences, electromagnetic fields, noise of dust, etc. [3].

Status knowledge: The assistance systems in a Smart Factory have to know the status or situation of the objects in order to provide users the context-aware information.

Update of smart management systems: Current object information like the status or location has to be communicated to the systems of the Smart Factory. As an example the highly dynamical data like the position of an object should be updated every 10 to 30 seconds [3].

Support for different queries: Assistance systems in the Smart Factory have to support different kinds of queries [3]. We can differentiate into object-based, location-based/spatial, temporal and combinations of the previous types of queries.

Integration of heterogeneous information: The integration challenge of different systems in an enterprise is caused by different information models, interfaces and data formats. In order to provide other systems easy accessible information, different systems have to be integrated into a common synchronizing platform.

Real-time characterized reaction: For supporting people and machines information has to be provided within seconds. This challenge addresses mainly communications technologies and database management.

### 0104. 主题卡 —— 智慧工厂架构

摘自「2021006Smart-Factory-of-Industry-4.0-Key-Technologies-Application-Case-and-Challenges.md」2018 年 3 月发表的论文

In the context of Industry 4.0, the intelligent manufacturing attracts enormous interest from government, enterprises and academic researchers [9]. Therefore, the construction patterns of smart factory are widely discussed. However, the standards for smart factory implementation have not been established yet. Benkamoun et al. [10] proposed a class diagram which can be used to represent the manufacturing system from different perspectives of entities and functions. Radziwon et al. [11] expounded former research from the concept of smart factory, and they pointed out that smart factory is actually an exploring of adaptive and ﬂexible manufacturing. Lin et al. [12] proposed an architecture for cloud manufacturing systems oriented to aerospace conglomerate, which facilitates optimal conﬁguration of manufacturing resources. 

1-2『目前个人比较认同 Radziwon et al. [11] 的观点，自适应和灵活性生产。然后发现这篇 Paper 已经下载了「2021011The Smart Factory: Exploring Adaptive and Flexible Manufacturing Solutions」并存入了 Zotero。（2021-01-29）』

The above-mentioned authors provided a guidance architecture for smart factory. In summary, the smart factory, which is based on digital and automated factory, uses information technology (e.g., cloud platform and IIoT) to improve the management of manufacturing resources and QoS [13], [14]. In order to build the smart factory, manufacturing enterprises should improve production and marketing, enhance controllability of production process, and reduce manual intervention in workshop. Through the analysis of manufacturing data, the smart factory can realize ﬂexible manufacturing, dynamic reconﬁguration, and production optimization, which are aimed to adapt the system to the changes of business model and consumer shopping behavior [15].

2『感觉 [13-15] 这篇 Paper 很重要。「2021025Context-Aware Cloud Robotics for Material Handling in Cognitive Industrial Internet of Things」目前没下载到原文，已下载「2021026Cloud Robotics: Current Status and Open Issues」、「2021006基于大数据的智慧工厂技术框架」并存入 Zotero。（2021-01-29）』

In the implementation of smart factory, the IIoT is employed to integrate the underlying equipment resources. Accordingly, the manufacturing system has abilities of perception, interconnection and data integration. The data analysis and scientiﬁc decision are used to achieve production scheduling, equipment service and quality control of products in smart factory. Further, the Internet of services is introduced to virtualize the manufacturing resources from a local database to the cloud server. Through the human-machine interaction, the global collaborative process of intelligent manufacturing oriented to the order-driven market is built. Therefore, the smart factory represents an engineering system that mainly consists of three aspects: interconnection, collaboration and execution. 

As shown in Fig. 1, the architecture of smart factory [16], [17] includes four layers, namely physical resource layer, network layer, data application layer, and terminal layer. With the aim to convert modern factory into smart factory, key technologies involved in all layers have to be studied in detail.

FIGURE 1. Hierarchical architecture of smart factory.

### 0105. 主题卡 —— 智慧工厂案例

摘自「2021006Smart-Factory-of-Industry-4.0-Key-Technologies-Application-Case-and-Challenges.md」2018 年 3 月发表的论文

From the view of intelligent manufacturing, manufacturing equipment should be equipped with the abilities of edge computing, environment perception, and coordination between equipment. The smart factory, which is a cyber-physical production system (CPPS), integrates intelligent sensors, embedded terminal systems, intelligent control system, and communications facilities. The peer to peer interaction (e.g., person to equipment, equipment to equipment, service to service) is achieved by CPPS. Therefore, building of smart factory should take into consideration manufacturing characteristics to meet rapidly-changing market needs [95], [96]. In the following, we use the laboratory prototype platform as an example to explore typical characteristics of smart factory. The laboratory prototype platform, which represents a candy packing production line, is shown in Fig. 8.

FIGURE 8. Prototype platform for the validation of key technologies.

1『看到这张图里的机器手臂，想到了以后车间的操作人员肯定会被机器人取代。（2021-01-29）』

According to the smart factory architecture, the prototype platform had four layers including the physical resources layer, the cloud service layer, the terminal layer, and the network layer. The prototype layers were as follows.

1 The physical resources layer was consisted of intelligent equipment, conveyor equipment, packing products. It was mainly responsible for execution of tasks such as processing, monitoring, and assembling. The manufacturing process information was the primary data source for upper application.

2 The cloud service layer contained the cloud platform (a service cluster system based on the Hadoop architecture) which provided data storage and computing resource for data application. The ontology model of packing line was built on the cloud platform, and a relationship between objects was established in two dimensions: structure and interaction. The Protégé was used to build application-oriented ontology, and complex constraints were expressed by semantic web rule language. The manufacturing data were uploaded to the cloud platform to form a semantic data model. Based on the knowledge base, the Jena tool was used to reason the equipment operating mode. This layer provides supports for the fault alarm, the resource allocation, and the scheduling optimization.

3 The terminal layer mainly included end-user devices, such as smart phones, desktop computers and electrical boards, which were distributed in workshop, ofﬁce, monitoring center and other regions. Terminal devices were used to visualize the results of cloud processing, and they supported remote monitoring of operation and maintenance. Moreover, customers were able to check the order in real time using the intelligent terminal.

4 The network layer was used to connect layers within smart factory. According to the distributed control, the connection between controller and actuator was implemented by ﬁeld bus, Modbus, and EtherCAT. The connection between equipment was achieved by the combination of Ethernet and DDS, which formed the self-organized network. The connection between equipment and cloud platform was implemented by integration of Ethernet and OPC UA, which provided data interaction.

The basic ﬂow of candy packing is as follows. Firstly, customers choose candy and purchase it online. Then, the order information is sent directly to the manufacturing system. Finally, the completed order is automatically transported by logistical system of smart factory. The candy packaging line has typical characteristics of smart factory, such as high interconnection, dynamical reconﬁguration, deep integration, and so on.

In the experiment, we took into account factors such as equipment availability, equipment performance, and qualiﬁed rate of products. Next, we developed a cloud-aided manufacturing system, which gave suggestions on scheduling optimization of self-organized equipment. The six-month experiment was performed on the equipment of candy packaging line. The smart meter is used to measure the total electrical energy for the equipment in the lab. We calculated the related parameter every day, and the average was took as the value of the month. As shown in Fig. 9, the Overall Equipment Effectiveness (OEE) of tested equipment is improved from 0.42 to 0.82 using the cloud-aided manufacturing system. Compared to the centralized scheduling, the self-organized scheduling with the cloud-aided manufacturing system has more remarkable effect. In general, the candy packing line is an example which was used to explore ﬂexibility, efﬁciency, and transparency of smart factory.

FIGURE 9. The overall effectiveness and influential factors of prototyping platform.

2『这里糖果包装线的智慧工厂案例蛮不错的，做一张主题卡片。（2021-01-29）』——已完成

### 0106. 主题卡 —— 智慧工厂案例

信息摘自「2021039Data-Abstraction-and-Hierarchy.md」

Object-oriented programming is primarily a data abstraction technique, and much of its power derives from this. However, it elaborates this technique with the notion of 'inheritance'. Inheritance can be used in a number of ways, some of which enhance the power of data abstraction. In these cases inheritance provides a useful addition to data abstraction.

1『数据抽象的一个标志是「减少了参数的数量」；面向对象编程模式竟然只是数据抽象的一种应用体现。（2021-06-12）』

This paper discusses the relationship between data abstraction and object-oriented programming. We begin in Section 2 by defining data abstraction and its role in the program development process. Then in Section 3 we discuss inheritance and identify two ways that it is used, for implementation hierarchy and for type hierarchy. Of the two methods, type hierarchy really adds something to data abstraction, so in Section 4 we discuss uses of type hierarchy in program design and development,. Next we discuss some issues that arise in implementing type hierarchy. We conclude with a summary of our results.

1『重点来了，「继承」的使用方式有 2 种：实现继承（implementation hierarchy）和类型继承（type hierarchy），前者对应于面向对象里的继承，后者对应于面向继承里的多态。一下子跟脑子里的「知识点」链接了，舒坦。继承的 2 种使用方式做一张主题卡片。（2021-06-12）』—— 已完成

### 0107. 主题卡 ——「类」是为了实现「数据抽象」的

信息摘自「2021039Data-Abstraction-and-Hierarchy.md」

In Smalltalk [4], data abstractions are implemented by classes. Classes can be arranged hierarchical but we ignore this for now. A class implements a data abstraction similarly to a cluster. Instead of the "rep =" line, the rep is described by a sequence of variable declarations; these are the instance variables. The remainder of the class consists of methods, which are procedure definitions. There is a method for each operation of the data type implemented by the class. (There cannot be any internal methods in Smalltalk classes because it is not possible to preclude outside use of a method.) Methods are called by "sending messages," which has the same effect as calling operations in CLU.

1-2『牢记一点，「类」是为了实现「数据抽象」的，这个目前认为是贯穿与这篇 Paper 的核心思想，做一张主题卡片。』

[1] We ignore the class variables here since they are not important for the distinctions we are trying to make. CLU has an analogous mechanism; a cluster can have some own variables. [9]

### 0201. 术语卡 —— Industrie 4.0

Therefore, the industry needs a radical change and it is the Industrie 4.0 that addresses this change. The core idea of Industrie 4.0 is to use the emerging information technologies to implement IoT and services so that business process and engineering process are deeply integrated making production operate in a flexible, efficient, and green way with constantly high quality and low cost.

1-2『这里对工业 4.0 下了个定义。做一张术语卡片。（2020-01-27）』——已完成

### 0202. 术语卡 —— 3C

computing, communication, and control.

Some emerging information technologies, such as IoT, big data, and cloud computing as well as artificial intelligence (AI) technologies (e.g., MAS) are enabling factors of Industrie 4.0. Integrating these technologies with industrial automation, business, and trade is able to achieve a huge improvement of industry. With powerful microprocessors and AI technologies, the products and machines become smart in the sense that they not only have abilities of computing, communication, and control (3C) but also have autonomy and sociality. With the support of industrial networks, these smart artifacts are interconnected with each other and with the Internet. With the cloud computing technology, the server network can be virtualized as a resource pool that can provide scalable computing ability and storage space on demand for big data analytics. With numerous information systems deployed on cloud and smart things connected to the same cloud, a novel world of IoT and services is created.

2『 3C 做一张术语卡片。（2021-01-28）』——已完成

### 0203. 术语卡 —— Lean Production

The production plants also become ever more complex despite all efforts at improving this situation. This in turn, results in longer planning phases and unacceptably long times-to-market. At this point, let's look back to 20 years ago. In the 1980s, we witnessed the first wave of integration of IT technologies into the factories computer integrated manufacturing (CIM), as it was called then The hope was that fully automated plants would solve cost and quality problems on the basis of state-of-the-art computer technology. Since humans would no longer fit in there, the visions of the future then aimed at deserted factories with no human workers. The reality arrived quite differently than imagined. These CIM systems were extremely complex in planning as well as in construction, operation, and maintenance. The technologies were not yet mature and the humans were overstrained. At the beginning of the 90's, when the crisis was obvious, a milestone was represented by the popular book by Womack, Jones and Roos: The Machine That Changed the World: The Story of Lean Production  (Womack, Jones, Roos, 1991), Which explained to the high-tech addicts in the western industry, how Toyota was able to build high quality automobiles with very simple production principles. These principles were known from then on as lean production, which became the paradigm of the beginning decade.

1-2『已下载书籍「2021059The-Machine-That-Changed-the-World」。Lean Production 做一张术语卡片。（2021-01-28）』——已完成

Lean production meant networks, not hierarchies; dynamic, self-coordinating work teams instead of monotonous assembly line jobs; and, most importantly, the personal responsibility of the individual worker. But this philosophy is directed primarily on the organization and less on the technologies.

### 0301. 人名卡 ——

根据这些证据和案例，找出源头和提出术语的人是谁——产生一张人名卡，并且分析他为什么牛，有哪些作品，生平经历是什么。

### 0401. 金句卡 ——

最后根据他写的非常震撼的话语——产生一张金句卡。

### 0501. 数据信息卡 —— Dominik Lucke 对智慧工厂的理解

摘自「2021008Smart-Factory-A-Step-towards-the-Next-Generation-of-Manufacturing.md」2008 年 1 月发表的论文

The downscaling of computer and sensor technologies supports the integration of knowledge at all scales of a holistic production system, aiming at increasing the transformability of the factory as a whole. The presented Smart Factory approach represents a real-time, context sensitive manufacturing environment that can handle turbulences in production using decentralized information and communication structures for an optimum management of Production processes. Based on the Nexus Platform it integrates heterogeneous information systems in manufacturing enterprise both horizontal (e. G. Between systems in the shop floor) and vertical (e. G. Between shop floor and management systems like ERP or MES) in order to reduce information deficits. In the framework of the research area Smart Factory at the Universitat Stuttgart, IFF, a Smart Factory environment has been developed and will be enhanced, aiming at implementing the vision of the next-generation real-time and context-aware production systems.

2『这里的总结算是本论文精华了，做一张信息数据卡片。（2021-01-28）』——已完成

### 0601. 任意卡 ——

最后还有一张任意卡，记录个人阅读感想。