Evolution and Revolution

· · · in which I argue that technology revolutions differ from scientific revolutions in that paradigms appear and disappear much more rapidly; new paradigms do not necessarily replace old ones; and the crises that trigger new paradigms do not arise so much from the discovery of anomalies but rather from increasing complexity and technology-driven opportunity.

6.1 Normal Engineering

In his Structure of Scientific Revolutions , Thomas Kuhn calls the research that is firmly grounded in an established paradigm「normal science.」The LIGO gravitational wave detector discussed in chapter 1 , with its firm grounding in Einstein's general theory of relativity, despite its monumental scale, qualifies under Kuhn's scheme as normal science.

Kuhn asserts that adherence to a paradigm is essential to normal science:

Without commitment to a paradigm there could be no normal science. (Kuhn, 1962, p. 100)

He calls normal science「mopping up operations」and「puzzle solving」and asserts that this is what engages most scientists throughout their careers. The paradigms within which they operate provide the framework for these operations.

We can similarly define「normal engineering」to be the process of design and optimization within an established methodology and an established set of rules. Given a requirement for, say, a web page with some interactive features, a software engineer is hired to design the HTML and JavaScript code for the web page. This sort of engineering is easily and effectively outsourced, and a whole industry has emerged in India to carry out such normal engineering.

Although normal engineering is routine, it nevertheless demands skill and benefits from talent. When designing a web page, for example, aesthetics are often as important as functionality. Malcolm McCullough, in his 1996 book Abstracting Craft , focuses on this aspect of normal engineering, observing that digital media, including the technology for creating web pages and other digital artifacts, offer a whole new form of craftsmanship. Unlike the physical crafts of, say, pottery and woodworking, this form of craft works with abstract media, the zeros and ones of computing. But like the physical crafts, abstract craft admits mastery and aesthetics.

Although normal science certainly admits mastery, it is a real stretch to say it admits aesthetics. A scientist may object, observing correctly that personal taste is involved in the selection of experiments to perform, the manner in which they are performed, and the way the results are presented to the scientific community. I have to agree that there is aesthetics in all of this, but the end product of normal science is not an artifact subject to aesthetic judgment. It is, for example, the LIGO validation of Einstein's prediction of gravitational waves. The goal of such validation is not to please the human senses or to stir the soul. It is to reaffirm the Platonic truth of a prevailing paradigm in physics. Kuhn asserts that the object of normal science「is to solve a puzzle for whose very existence the validity of the paradigm must be assumed. Failure to achieve a solution discredits only the scientist and not the theory」(Kuhn, 1962, p. 80). How indeed would LIGO be viewed if it failed to detect any gravitational waves? Would it have undermined Einstein's theory of relativity? Probably not.

A failure to create an effective or successful interactive web page would discredit the software engineers assigned to the task. It would not undermine the paradigm of the web or of the HTML and JavaScript languages. Success in such a project requires some technology, but even more it requires craftsmanship.

Craftsmanship is human skill creating artifacts that did not previously exist. But the craftsmanship in normal engineering is distinctly different from innovation. A beautiful web page that is a pleasure to interact with is not necessarily innovative and almost certainly does not constitute an invention, just as normal science does not seek novelties:

Normal science does not aim at novelties of fact or theory and, when successful, finds none. (Kuhn, 1962, p. 52)

Craftsmanship and aesthetics can have as much or more impact on the success of an engineering task as innovation. One of the factors in the success of the iPhone is undoubtedly the aesthetic physical design, credited to Jonathan Ive. Amazingly, Apple managed to patent this design, stamping it as an invention. The patent contains one claim, the entire text of which is,「The ornamental design for a portable display device, as shown and described」(Akana et al., 2012). In my opinion, this is an abomination that goes against any reasonable notion of what constitutes an invention. The U.S. Patent and Trademark Office should be ashamed of itself.

Of course, not all of engineering admits aesthetics easily. The design of a sewage handling system for a building usually has only one aesthetic goal: make it invisible. Even so, occasionally even plumbing is used as an aesthetic medium. Witness the Pompidou Center in Paris, which exposes its guts in a bold and aesthetically driven reversal of conventional practice in architecture (see figure 6.1 ). But with digital media, aesthetic elements are much more common than in other branches of engineering.

As with any craft, mastery of digital media can have an enormous effect on the outcome of a project. But mastery of a craft is quite orthogonal to innovation. Innovation can occur within the framework of an established paradigm, of course. But a truly game-changing innovation, such as the stored-program computer credited to von Neumann or the World Wide Web credited to Berners-Lee, is more like Kuhn's paradigm shifts than like practice within a paradigm. These innovations change the practice of normal engineering for many successor engineers. The question I will address next is what brings about these paradigm shifts. It turns out that the situation in engineering is quite different from that in science.

Figure 6.1

The Pompidou Center in Paris exposes the building's mechanical functions for aesthetic reasons. The building was designed by Richard Rogers, Renzo Piano, Gianfranco Franchini, and their teams, and opened in 1977. [Image licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0 by「Reinraum.」From https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?curid=37297406 .]

6.2 Crisis and Failure

Kuhn claims that scientific revolutions occur only after an accretion of anomalous observations made under the old paradigm creates a crisis and only when a new paradigm emerges to replace the old. These are not the forces that drive paradigm shifts in technology.

Paradigm shifts in technology occur for at least three reasons. First, the complexity of systems being engineered overwhelms our human ability to understand or control these systems. For example, programming languages emerged because writing correct machine or assembly code became impossibly difficult. Second, it becomes possible to do something that nobody imagined was possible before. For example, Google and other search engines enable nearly instantaneous search over everything humans have ever published. Third, complex social, political, and business forces can drive paradigm shifts in technology. Military needs, for example, essentially created aviation, nuclear weapons, and many other technologies, and military budgets provided most of the funding for the early development of computing.

Figure 6.2

In scientific revolutions, according to Kuhn, new paradigms typically replace old paradigms. In technology revolutions, new paradigms may be built on top of old paradigms, not replacing them so much as hiding them behind a layer of abstraction. (Photos of a sign with the likeness of Charles Darwin on Santa Cruz Island in the Galapagos.)

In section 3.2 , Complexity Simplified , I pointed out that one source of complexity is a large number of parts. Even simple parts with simple functions, such as transistors acting as switches, when there are enough of them, enable enormously complex functionality. Digital technology, rooted in these transistors, has been an enormous source of complexity-driven paradigm shifts for several decades.

In 1965, Gordon Moore, cofounder of Intel, 1 famously predicted that the number of components (transistors, resistors, diodes, and capacitors) in an integrated circuit would double every year for at least the next ten years. In 1975, he revised the forecast rate to double approximately every two years. This prediction, widely known as「Moore's law,」has been a guiding principle for the semiconductor industry ever since.

In practice, until around 2015, Moore's prediction held steady. The Intel 8080 was a single-chip microcomputer introduced in 1974 with approximately 4,400 transistors. According to Moore's law, therefore, a single-chip microcomputer in 2014 should contain

4,400 × 2 (2014−1974)/2 ≈ 4,610,000,000 transistors,

which is remarkably close to the 5.56 billion transistors on the Intel Xeon Haswell-E5, introduced in 2014. Although the demise of Moore's law has been predicted many times, most industry observers seem to agree that as of 2015, it has finally significantly slowed.

This rapid acceleration of the capabilities of digital technology has created a steady stream of crises, where inevitably the models and mechanisms used to design and program systems repeatedly break down under the crush of additional capability. As far back as 1972, Edsger Dijkstra, wrote,

To put it quite bluntly: as long as there were no machines, programming was no problem at all; when we had a few weak computers, programming became a mild problem, and now we have gigantic computers, programming has become an equally gigantic problem. (Dijkstra, 1972)

And that was just 1972! If it was a gigantic problem then, then there is no word for what it is now.

Moore's law refers only to individual computers on individual silicon chips. Today, we find an extraordinary rise in the number of computing devices that are interconnected through networks. Around 1980, Robert Metcalfe, cofounder of 3Com and coinventor of Ethernet, the most widely used wired networking technology today, is said to have postulated what is now known as Metcalfe's law. This law states that the value of a network is proportional to the square of the number of compatible communicating devices on the network. So, for example, if a single isolated device is worth $1, then a network with 10 connected devices is worth

$1 × 10 2 = $100.

A network with 100 devices would be similarly worth $10,000, and with 1000 devices, $1,000,000. I'll let you calculate Metcalfe's assessment of the worth of the Internet today, which has roughly six billion connected devices.

And the number of connected devices is growing fast. Today, industry leaders breathlessly predict some 50 billion connected devices by 2020, due to the rise of the so-called Internet of Things (IoT). The IoT connects devices that are not first and foremost computers, such as thermostats, cars, door locks, climate control systems, and so on. As they give such predictions, you can almost see the visions of dollars dancing in their eyes.

Because value presumably follows from capability, I assume that Metcalfe would conclude that the capability of a network, not just the value, is also proportional to the square of the number of connected devices. Because complexity typically also follows from capability, we should not expect any slowing of crises over the next few years, even if Moore's law grinds to a halt. The crush of increasing complexity does not appear to be slowing.

In any technology, increasing complexity can create crises in two ways. First, designing reliable systems becomes harder. The tools and models that worked well at lower complexity strain until they break as the complexity increases. Second, perhaps as a consequence of the first, the likelihood that a design project will fail increases.

When I worked at Bell Labs in the early 1980s, a large project called AIS/Net 1000 intended to provide bridges between the disparate computing systems that existed at the time. At that time, interconnecting computers through networks was quite a new phenomenon, and as evidenced by Metcalfe's law, the value of such interconnections was recognized, at least by Metcalfe.

But these interconnections exposed many incompatibilities between the computer systems, particularly computer systems from different vendors. These systems had been designed to work in isolation. The binary bit patterns used to represent numbers and text, for example, were different. The order in which bits were arranged in memory differed. The protocols and speeds used to communicate differed. These differences meant that one computer often could not directly communicate with another, and even if it could, it would not interpret the bit patterns produced by the other correctly. In effect, each computer operated within its own paradigm, and the paradigms were incommensurable.

As computers became networked, these incompatibilities triggered a crisis. AIS/Net 1000 aimed to solve this problem by performing translations within the network, permitting the disparate paradigms to persist. When one computer sends a message to another, the message would be automatically translated during transport. Nobody would have to change how they did things, and AT&T would sell the glue that enabled interoperability. This was to be the Babel fish of networks. 2

The project failed. AT&T wrote off more than $1 billion of development effort. It turns out that few customers were actually willing to pay for this service. Instead, the paradigms saw a Darwinian consolidation. Competing species were unable to coexist within the same ecosystem of networked computers.

Instead of a Babel fish, the Internet emerged. A key enabler for the Internet was the acceptance of the so-called Open Systems Interconnection (OSI) model. OSI is a layering of modeling paradigms, sketched in figure 6.3 . Like the layers in figure 3.3 , each level of the OSI model provides a conceptual framework for communication between computers. The lowest level, called the physical layer, is concerned with transporting sequences of bits from one place to another without concern for what the bits mean. The layers above this assign more meaning to the bits. For example, layer 6, the presentation layer, may treat a collection of, say, one million bits as an encoding of an image in a particular format, such as the standardized JPEG format widely used in digital cameras and on the web.

Kuhn talks about paradigms being incommensurable. In the OSI model, the terms「frame,」「packet,」「segment,」and「session」all refer to a finite collection of bits, but they all have different meanings at different levels. Understanding these different meanings is one of the most confusing parts about working with low-level networking software, in my experience. It is much easier to work at exactly one of these levels and not try to cross layers.

Calling the layers of the OSI model「paradigms」is perhaps a bit odd because they differ significantly from Kuhn's scientific paradigms. Like Kuhn's paradigms, they do provide a mental model for humans to understand how a system operates. For example, it is a different mental model to visualize one computer sending an image, a photograph, to another, versus visualizing one computer sending a stream of one million bits. But unlike Kuhn's paradigms, for these layers to work, their definition must be made absolutely precise. A misinterpretation of a single bit among one million bits may render an image unreadable. Kuhn's paradigms are much more robust; they can tolerate a certain amount of creative misunderstanding, which can sometimes form the engine for innovation or even paradigm shifts.

Figure 6.3

The OSI model for communication between computers.

It is not easy to make the OSI model layers precise. For computers on the Internet to reliably communicate, they all need to agree on precise meanings at every layer, down to the interpretations of each individual bit. The process of building the standards that codify this agreement can be a messy, political, and bureaucratic morass of conflicting national and business interests.

As a case in point, it may be helpful to understand how the OSI model came about. The OSI model is a joint effort of two standardization bodies, the International Organization for Standardization (ISO) and the Telecommunication Standardization Sector of the International Telecommunication Union (ITU-T, formerly CCITT), which had each separately developed similar models for communicating computers in the late 1970s. But similar models are not enough to get computers to communicate. The models have to be identical. Hence, these two bodies got together to publish a joint document, a process that no doubt involved considerable bickering over minutia.

To get a sense of all the competing interests that get involved, it may be helpful to understand how these standardization bodies are organized. The ISO is composed of representatives of various national standardization agencies from some 162 countries. The ITU-T, a United Nations agency, coordinates standards for telecommunications. In addition to representatives from many governments, these bodies include representatives from competing businesses, some of which will have already sunk considerable investments into the technologies being standardized. As a consequence, the battles that can emerge over standards development can be prolonged and painful, and the ensuing compromises can sometimes undermine the effectiveness of the resulting standards.

JPEG, one of the most commonly used encodings for photographs and a level-6 (presentation layer) standard in the OSI model, is an acronym for the Joint Photographic Experts Group, which created the standard. This group is a committee overlapping ISO/IEC JTC1 and ITU-T, the same organizations involved in the OSI model, except for the addition of the International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC). The IEC is a nongovernmental international standards organization that develops standards for electrical, electronic, and related technologies. Surely by now, from the barrage of acronyms, you see how bureaucratic all of this is.

As with many such standards, one of the complexities that arose with JPEG concerned intellectual property. A major challenge in establishing such international standards is to ensure that anyone can legally use the standard without infringing on the rights of someone else. There can be quite a bit of posturing during the development of a standard, where businesses will attempt to ensure that the use of the standard requires license payments to them for patents that they hold or where patents that they hold will give them a competitive advantage when implementing the standard. Organizations can even be quite sneaky about this, concealing their business interests from the standards body until it is too late to change the standard. As a result, standards often do not reflect the best technical solutions to a problem.

In the case of JPEG, after publication of the standard, several companies asserted that the standard infringed on patents that they held. In a collection of notable cases starting around 2007, a patent holding company called Global Patent Holdings, LLC, claimed that the act of downloading a JPEG image from a website or sending it through email infringed a patent that it held, U.S. Patent 5,253,341 by Rozmanith and Berinson (1993). A messy set of suits, countersuits, and threats ensued. According to a Wikipedia article on JPEG,

Global Patent Holdings had also used the '341 patent to sue or threaten outspoken critics of broad software patents. ( https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/JPEG , retrieved April 26, 2016)

After extensive battles, the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office issued a Reexamination Certificate in 2009 canceling all claims of the patent, asserting that prior art invalidated the claims. By this time, many organizations had wasted enormous amounts of money on completely nonproductive fights over intellectual property.

A patent holding company is a corporation that does not manufacture or sell products but just acquires and holds patents for the purpose of extracting royalty payments from companies that do sell products. Such companies are often called「patent trolls,」after the troll in the Norwegian fairy tale「Three Billy Goats Gruff」who eats anyone who tries to cross the bridge under which it lives.

The emergence of patent trolls has significantly changed the business climate for technology companies in the United States. An organization that produces a product and also owns a patent portfolio may be hesitant to sue another organization that also owns a patent portfolio because that other organization may countersue for patent infringement. But an organization that does not produce any products is much less vulnerable to countersuits. These organizations exist only for the purpose of siphoning money from organizations that produce products. In my opinion, they are parasites.

But I digress. The main point is that it is not only creativity that determines the nature of the layers of paradigms in a technology, but that complex business and political interests can also intervene. These layers, therefore, are not in any sense objective truths. They are the result of flawed and human processes.

AIS/Net 1000 failed to solve the crises created when incompatible computers started to become networked. That crisis has since been largely resolved through the emergence of the Internet, which depends on standardization of all levels of the OSI model. The so-called Internet Protocol (IP, not to be confused with intellectual property) is at level 3 in the OSI model, the network layer. All traffic in the Internet uses IP. A layer above, at the transport layer, is the widely used Transmission Control Protocol (TCP), which overlays on IP the concept of reliable transmission. Specifically, a TCP/IP packet sent to a computer must be acknowledged by that computer. The sending computer will repeatedly send the packet until it receives an acknowledgment. As a consequence, barring catastrophic failure in the network or in the sending or receiving computer, every sent packet is eventually received. TCP also ensures that packets sent in order are received in the same order. TCP is essential to email, among many other services.

Email, in turn, relies on another protocol called SMTP, for Simple Mail Transfer Protocol, a level-5 protocol (session layer). At this level, a sequence of TCP/IP packets is collected into a unit, an email message. The design of this protocol is greatly simplified by being able to assume the properties of the lower layers, specifically that packets are delivered reliably and in order. If you send a JPEG image by email, then the level-6 (presentation layer) protocol for JPEG image encoding defines the interpretation of the bits contained in the packets as an image.

The OSI model provides separation of concerns, where routing of packets, reliable delivery and ordering, email addressing and content, and encoding of the email payload are all separated. Each of the protocols involved is much easier to design and understand because it uses the properties of the layers below, and it avoids providing capabilities that will be provided by a layer above.

AIS/Net 1000 offered a solution to a crisis but it turned out not to be the solution that prevailed. I believe a key reason is the lack of separation of concerns. AIS/Net 1000 was to be the single solution to interconnectedness, whereas the OSI model made it possible for many competing solutions at each layer to fight it out, creating a Darwinian ecosystem with distinct niches within which solutions could compete.

There are other spectacular technology failures with similar reasons. Ed Cone blogs about the failure of the Federal Aviation Administration's (FAA's) Advanced Automation System (AAS) project, conceived in 1981 and terminated in 1994 (Cone, 2002). In this project, the FAA contracted IBM Federal Systems, a division of IBM later acquired by Lockheed Martin, to replace the nation's air traffic control system with a completely new modern design. According to Cone,「the FAA ultimately declared that $1.5 billion worth of hardware and software of the $2.6 billion spent was useless.」

The historical backdrop of the project is telling. In 1981, the air traffic controllers went on strike, and President Ronald Reagan summarily fired all 11,345 of them. This accentuated a crisis already under way created by an aging inflexible air traffic control system. Part of the solution was to be a system that was more automated, requiring fewer controllers to manage more planes.

Robert Britcher, who worked on the project at IBM Federal Systems, wrote about it in his book, The Limits of Software: People, Projects, and Perspectives , where he states that it「may have been the greatest debacle in the history of organized work」(Britcher, 1999, p. 163).

Why did it fail? Cone quotes Pete Marish, a senior analyst at the General Accounting Office:

It was basically a Big Bang approach, gigantic programs that would revolutionize overnight how [the] FAA did its work. (Cone, 2002)

Cone further quotes Bill Krampf, who worked on the project at IBM Federal Systems:

We entered [the] software phase without the requirements phase completed. (Cone, 2002)

Krampf's observation, however, is probably a misdiagnosis of the problem. I seriously doubt that completing the requirements phase before starting the work on software would have solved the problem. The idea of completing requirements before engaging in detailed design goes against the grain of one of today's most popular software engineering strategies, called「agile development.」In an agile process, requirements are developed along with the software through a series of incremental「sprints,」short development efforts with modest partial goals toward the overall project objective. An agile process directly involves the customer and expects requirements to evolve as the project evolves. This way of managing complexity is more realistic than doing specification before design.

Marish's diagnosis is likely more accurate. Wholesale technology replacements generally require too many concurrent paradigm shifts. Indeed, Cone attributes the failure to enormous optimism about emerging immature technology paradigms, including object-oriented design, distributed computing, and the Ada programming language. Cone writes,

AAS was supposed to be a showcase for Unix-based distributed computing and for development in Ada, a programming language created by the Air Force that became the state-sponsored religion in object-oriented technology, itself a relatively young methodology for writing code in self-contained, reusable chunks. (Cone, 2002)

I find the words「state-sponsored religion」fascinating; they reflect the dogmatic fervor that I frequently encounter in computer scientists who espouse devotion to one or another programming language.

Another dramatic failure of a large engineering project was the U.S. Army's Future Combat Systems (FCS) program. Although there were many reasons that this program failed, one was similar to the reason for the failure of the FAA's AAS program: the program was too ambitious about replacing too many systems all at once. According to a 2012 report by the RAND Corporation,

Compared to more traditional acquisition strategies, the [systems-of-systems] approach significantly increased both the complexity of the organizations needed to execute the FCS program and the technical challenges associated with system engineering, software engineering, and system integration. (Pernin et al., 2012)

The FCS program was launched in 2003 with an estimated cost of $92 billion (including the projected cost of a fleet of war-fighting vehicles). By 2009, when Defense Secretary Robert Gates announced that he wanted to scrap the core of the program, the suite of combat vehicles, the estimated cost had ballooned to some $200 billion.

AIS/Net 1000, the FAA's AAS program, and Army's FCS program were all attempting to solve enormously complex problems. When complexity becomes unmanageable, a crisis in the prevailing paradigms becomes apparent. AIS/Net 1000 had as its goal to ameliorate the crisis without inducing a paradigm shift. But that's not how it played out. Instead, the Internet emerged. The other two projects failed in part because they attempted to address crises with a wholesale replacement of many existing paradigms all at once. But technology paradigms grow more organically, more bottom up than top down. They are not imposed on engineers so much as discovered, nurtured, and grown by engineers.

Wholesale simultaneous replacement of several paradigms at once fails because each individual replacement has poor prospects of success. The fact is that most technology innovations fail. We tend to remember only the ones that succeed. It is often impossible to predict which of several competing technologies will eventually prevail, even when it seems clear which technology is more fit.

The layering of paradigms offers a fundamentally creative way to deal with a crisis of complexity. One solution is not to fix a broken paradigm, replacing it with a new one, but rather to build an entirely new paradigm on the scaffolding of the old. We build platforms on top of platforms. Because of separation of concerns, a layer in a paradigm can change, and the effects will only be felt one layer up. In the Internet, for example, at layer 3 of the OSI model, the world is in the midst of migrating from IP version 4 to IP version 6 (no version 5 was ever deployed).

The new version IPv6 changes quite a few fundamental things, including the addresses used to identify nodes in the Internet. IPv4, it turns out, provides only four billion distinct addresses. Given that there are already six billion devices on the Internet, this obviously creates problems. Considerable cleverness is required to reuse addresses without creating ambiguities. IPv6 increases the number of addresses to

2 128 = 340,282,366,920,938,463,463,374,607,431,768,211,456.

It simply would not be possible to make such a fundamental change without the separation of concerns offered by the OSI model. This change has no effect, for example, on the JPEG encoding of images transmitted over the Internet.

Similarly, the layers of digital technology in figure 3.3 provide separation of concerns that permits independent simultaneous evolution at all levels. For example, the shift to using FinFETs for transistors had no effect on the design of instruction set architectures, except perhaps to offer opportunities through added capability. I examine this question of opportunity next.

6.3 Crisis and Opportunity

According to Kuhn, observations made in the course of normal science may reveal anomalies, inconsistencies with the prevailing paradigm that governs the normal science. These anomalies can create a crisis that leads to a paradigm shift. In engineering, it is not usually scientific observations that create a crisis. We have already seen that increasing complexity can trigger a crisis. A second trigger is opportunity.

Consider the introduction of the iPhone in 2007. At the time, two of the dominant producers of cell phones were Nokia, a Finnish company, and Research in Motion (RIM), a Canadian company, maker of the Blackberry. These two companies have drastically reduced visibility in the cell phone market today. I've already pointed out that the iPhone introduced no new technology. So why was it such a revolution, summarily overthrowing the old regime?

The「crisis」in the paradigm overthrown by the iPhone was not a crisis of complexity. It was a crisis of opportunity. At the time, cell phones were starting to be used for things other than making phone calls. The Blackberry had captured business markets with its built-in keyboard and email capability. Nokia phones were routinely used, primarily by young people, to send text messages, despite the incredible awkwardness of typing text on a 12-key numeric keypad. At the time, there were even contests for speed texting on such keypads because it required quite a bit of skill.

In 2007, wireless networks had modest ability to carry data, although the emphasis was still on carrying voice signals. That capability was exploited by the Blackberry and by the texting function on other phones, but phones were still primarily for making voice calls. Today, the ability to make voice calls seems like an incidental feature of a smartphone. When I want a voice call with my 20-year-old daughter, I need to exchange several text messages with her to arrange it. She acquiesces only in deference to my age. Her other communications are likely more through Snapchat and other services I've never heard of.

The iPhone came about through a realization of what was possible with the technology of the time. But the real revolution was not replacing the phones of the time with better phones. It was the introduction of a whole new platform, a new layer in the stack of layers of paradigms. Specifically, the real revolution was the introduction of the app development platform. With the introduction of the iPhone, Apple published the specifications that enabled millions of creative programmers around the world to develop applications for the phone and in 2008 launched the App Store to broker the sales of apps to customers.

The nature of a revolution is that its consequences usually cannot be anticipated, but after the revolution its consequences seem inevitable. It is easy to forget today that in 2007, most of us had never heard of apps and app stores, although, as usual with technology innovations, variants of the concept had existed at least since the 1990s. But Apple really made the concept take off. Apple's model has been emulated by every cell phone vendor that still has any significance, down to the details of copying the patented look of the phone, a move that has resulted in an endless string of patent infringement lawsuits and countersuits.

I am quite sure that if we could time travel back to 2007 and assemble the smartest, most creative experts worldwide in a room, they would not be able to anticipate even 10% of the functions that we routinely carry around in our pockets today: instant traffic reports worldwide (go ahead: check the traffic in Budapest right now), airline reservations, banking transactions (even check deposits), tide charts, worldwide weather forecasts, up-to-the-minute mass transit timetables, remote monitoring of our homes, a taxi service, restaurant reviews, a library with millions of books and journals, and many creative games. In addition to all those functions that never before existed, the device replaces several other devices that we previously would have to carry separately, including the phone, the music player, a flashlight, the keys to our house, the video entertainment device (remember the portable DVD player?), a compass, a calculator, an address book, our calendar, a camera, a radio, a notepad, and an alarm clock. Oh yes, and it also sends text messages and email.

The smartphone was not a consequence of a crisis of complexity, it was a consequence of opportunity enabled by millions of transistors on a chip, good digital radios, touch-screen interfaces, and the Internet, all preexisting technologies. The key to the revolution, the decisive battle that won the war, was the app development platform and the app store.

In recent years, we have seen an astonishing number of similarly disruptive revolutions. Amazon put thousands of bookstores out of business and is in the process of threatening the rest of retail. Uber and Lyft have undermined the taxi business. Lulu and other print-on-demand services are threatening the publishing industry. E-books are threatening Lulu and the rest of the printing industry. Libraries are increasingly irrelevant. Travel agencies have almost entirely vanished.

Each of these revolutions entails a paradigm shift. But paradigm shifts do not come easily to people, lending some stability and inertia. Even disruptive changes take some time to play out. According to Statista, an online statistics company, there were still about 28,000 bookstores in the United States in 2012. Although this number is down significantly from more than 38,000 in 2004, it is still a significant number.

Some paradigm shifts replace prior paradigms. Even for taxi services, for example, we are now more likely to summon them using a smartphone app or a web page than via a phone call. But all of these paradigm shifts also build on prior paradigms, leaving them unchanged. Smartphone technology, for example, relies heavily on Internet technology, the latter of which has hardly changed in response to this revolution. To be sure, there are small changes, such as better support at OSI levels 6 and 7 for small screens, but these changes are tiny. The prior paradigm provides a platform for the new paradigm, a situation rarely seen in the scientific paradigm shifts that Kuhn talks about. The transitivity of models makes this possible.

Many examples of failed paradigm shifts also exist. In the 1980s, for example, several university research projects and startup companies were going to disrupt the computer industry with dataflow computers, which presented an entirely different way to define an instruction set architecture (Arvind et al., 1991). These all failed. Perhaps a more curious example is the repeated failure of artificial intelligence (AI) as a field. AI has survived several boom and bust cycles, where unbridled enthusiasm is followed by disillusionment and collapse of investment. Starting in the late 1980s, AI experienced what some researchers in the field called an「AI winter,」an allusion to a nuclear winter, and had only fully recovered by about 2010. Perhaps dataflow computers will be similarly resurrected. Such failures fade quickly from our memory (except, of course, for the people most directly involved in the failures).

But failures are a normal and healthy part of intellectual inquiry. The rapid advances of digital technology provide a healthy, thriving ecosystem for mutation, adaptation, and extinction of paradigms. There need not be anything fundamentally wrong with a new paradigm that fails. Unlike scientific paradigms, technology paradigms are not held up to a standard of truth or concurrence with observations of the physical world. Their survival instead depends on many intangibles, including, perhaps most important, the readiness of the public and even the engineers to assimilate the paradigm.

6.4 Models in Crisis

Paradigm shifts in engineering are triggered primarily by crises of complexity and opportunity. These have been relentlessly driven for the last 50 years by the staggering advances in digital technology. They continue to be driven by the increasing interconnectedness of digital devices and penetration of computers into everything we use.

So where are the most pressing crises today? For this question, I can only speculate because I cannot see the future any better than anyone else. But I do see at least two substantial crises looming.

Let me start with a crisis of opportunity. With increasing interconnectedness comes rapidly increasing volumes of data about the state of the world, society, and individuals in society. For example, credit card companies already carefully track most of our purchases, missing only the ones where we pay cash. These companies construct models of our behavior and use those models for various purposes, including to disallow transactions that appear to be anomalous and hence may be fraudulent. For example, if you don't travel much, and a store in China tries to charge a purchase to your credit card, then the transaction is likely to be denied by the credit card company's computers. If you travel a lot, as I do, however, then this same transaction is more likely to be allowed. If you normally buy expensive scotch at boutique stores, then a purchase of Rotgut Moonshine at a store called Payroll Loans & Liquor is also likely to be denied.

These decisions are not made by humans; they are made by computers, the ones that dream (see section 5.6 ). The computers are running machine-learning algorithms that build models of your behavior by observing your transactions and then classify each subsequent transaction as anomalous or normal based on the probability that the model would generate such behavior.

The credit card example exhibits a contradiction that is common in big data applications. Although we probably appreciate that the credit card company attempts to prevent fraudulent use of our card, many of us find it creepy that the company has built a probabilistic model of our behavior. Similarly, we may like that a map app on our smartphone tells us about nearby restaurants, but we are likely not thrilled to learn that, as a consequence of using the app, Google's computers know where we are.

Now imagine that the computers in your car begin to communicate with the outside world. Some insurance programs already use such communicated information to vary your insurance bill based on usage and style of driving. What if the insurance company sells the information they get from your car to your credit card company? Metcalfe's law is based in part on the observation that aggregated data is more valuable than isolated data. The credit card company may now verify that your car is indeed parked at Payroll Loans & Liquor and either allow the transaction or report your car stolen.

The data being gathered about us by various organizations is growing at a staggering rate. In the United States, privacy laws intended to protect us from misuse of that data are ineffective because these laws have simply resulted in a barrage of small print that every organization is now required to throw at you, knowing that you will not read it. In fact, the U.S. government has exhibited a distinctly double standard, simultaneously trying to strengthen privacy laws and prevent encrypted data communication. Encryption, the government says, interferes with its ability to detect and prevent potential terrorist attacks. Indeed, it no doubt does. Again, we are faced with contradictory requirements.

Many organizations today are collecting but not effectively using vast amounts of data. Consulting and market research company Gartner calls「dark data」the「information assets that organizations collect, process and store in the course of their regular business activity, but generally fail to use for other purposes.」The subtext is that those same businesses are missing an opportunity. They should be mining the data. The data has value.

The research and consulting firm Forrester defines「perishable insights」as「urgent business situations (risks and opportunities) that firms can only detect and act on at a moment's notice.」Fraud detection for credit cards is just one example of such perishable insights. Once the transaction is allowed, the damage is done. We also saw another example of a perishable insight in chapter 1 in the Wikipedia vandalism detection algorithm, although that one has less privacy cost. More dramatically, dark data in health care and medicine could be much better used to get (literally) perishable insights.

I believe a crisis of opportunity exists today in converting data feeds into insights in time to make effective use of them while either ensuring privacy or at least preserving public trust that the loss of privacy will not be abused. Clearly, this problem is not just technical.

Contradictory requirements demand innovation. Consider that thermostats, door locks, television sets, watches, running shoes, football helmets, books, and, in fact, nearly everything around us is going online. And many devices are acquiring the ability to listen for spoken words and react to those words. And when you read an electronic book, it reads you back. Connecting those devices to the network is likely to deliver real value to us, including, for example, reducing our carbon footprint and vulnerability to terrorists. These potential benefits cannot be ignored. Neither can the risks. The situation is crying for a paradigm shift.

The second crisis I see looming is a crisis of complexity. This crisis is not just about increasing numbers of components but rather about the conjoining of engineered systems that have traditionally used different kinds of models to manage their own complexity.

Consider a modern commercial airplane such as the Airbus A350 or the Boeing 787. These systems are software-intensive with hundreds of microprocessors managing functions that include translating pilot commands into rudder movements, controlling the landing gear, managing cabin pressurization and airflow, managing electric power generation and distribution, and operating the passenger entertainment system. Such an aircraft is a much more complex system than, say, a data center handling Facebook pages. The latter only has to deal with bits and the heat generated by processing those bits. A data center is an information-processing system that can operate almost entirely within the models and paradigms of computer science. But an airplane design conjoins models of aeronautical, mechanical, electrical, and civil engineering, as well as those of computer science. In such a system, the structures of civil engineering interact with the flight dynamics of aeronautical engineering under the control of a software system (computer science) running a feedback control system (electrical engineering). The silos of specialization that are standard in engineering today become an obstacle because the models and paradigms developed in each of these disciplines are incommensurable.

Despite the enormous complexity and challenges of crossing so many silos, Boeing and Airbus both manage to make astonishingly safe and reliable airplanes. How? Today, their design processes and methods are extremely conservative, and regulatory oversight is heavy. Many rules must be followed to get an aircraft certified to carry civilian passengers.

However, these processes reveal some fundamental flaws in the engineering models and methodologies that are available today to aircraft engineers. A symptom of such flaws is a story I first heard from an engineer who had worked on the Boeing 777. This was Boeing's first fly-by-wire airliner, meaning that pilot controls are mediated by a computer. The 777 first entered into service in 1995. According to this engineer, as of the early 1990s, Boeing expected this model of aircraft to be in production for perhaps 50 years, to 2045. The engineer told me that in the early 1990s, Boeing purchased a 50-year supply of the microprocessors for the flight control system so they could use the same microprocessors for the entire production run of the aircraft.

Recall in chapter 4 my observation that hardware is ephemeral. In fact, any particular silicon chip is unlikely to remain in production for more than a few years. It becomes obsolete quickly under the pressure of Moore's law. And when a fab gets updated to leverage a new technology, such as the FinFET, it becomes impossible to produce an identical chip.

But why does Boeing need the chip to be identical? The whole point of the layering of paradigms of figure 3.3 is so that software designs are isolated from changes in the hardware. It should be enough to use any chip that can correctly execute the software for the control system.

But the flaw is in the notion of correctness. Starting at the instruction set architecture layer in figure 3.3 , and for all layers above that, what it means to correctly execute software has nothing to do with how long it takes to do anything. Timing of actions is not part of the programming paradigms used today.

But in a flight control system, the software is directly controlling physical actuators, and in the physical world, timing is important. In fact, in just about every model that an aeronautical, mechanical, or electrical engineer will use, timing of actions is central to the model. The paradigms used by these engineers are incommensurable with the paradigms used by computer scientists.

As a consequence, the layering of figure 3.3 fails to provide adequate abstractions, and hence fails to provide separation of concerns. Boeing is forced to operate without any layering, and hence has to ensure that every airplane carries exactly the same design all the way down to the semiconductor physics layer.

I have subsequently heard similar stories from engineers at Airbus, which has been making fly-by-wire aircraft for longer than Boeing. The engineers at Airbus tell me that they store the microprocessors in liquid nitrogen in an attempt to extend their shelf life by slowing down the natural diffusion processes of the dopants in the silicon.

The complexity of aircraft designs keeps increasing. A key objective in aircraft design is to decrease weight because this reduces fuel consumption, extends range, and improves the carbon footprint. One way to decrease weight is to use more advanced materials in the airframe and more flexible structures. But flexible structures require more tightly coordinated control systems. Timing discrepancies in control systems can create disastrous stresses on airframe structures.

Another way to decrease weight is to reduce the amount of wiring and hydraulic piping. This can be accomplished with more advanced networking, but essentially all of the layers in the OSI model of figure 6.3 above the physical layer also ignore timing, just like the software layers in figure 3.3 . As a consequence, aircraft manufacturers are unable to benefit from most of the advances in networking of the last 40 years.

Even with a fixed microprocessor, the fact that timing is irrelevant to correctness from the ISA up means that in software design, aircraft manufacturers also cannot use most of the innovations of computer science from the last 40 years. The FAA prohibits use of object-oriented languages, for example, in safety-critical software. Even interrupts, the standard way that all modern microprocessors get data in and send data out to the outside world, are prohibited. To be sure, interrupts create many subtle software problems. As far back as 1972, Edsger Dijkstra lamented,

[I]n one or two respects modern machinery is basically more difficult to handle than the old machinery. Firstly, we have got the interrupts, occurring at unpredictable and irreproducible moments; compared with the old sequential machine that pretended to be a fully deterministic automaton, this has been a dramatic change, and many a systems programmer's grey hair bears witness to the fact that we should not talk lightly about the logical problems created by that feature. (Dijkstra, 1972)

Despite this lament, to this day, interrupts remain the primary method for I/O and are central to every modern operating system design. Aircraft manufacturers, therefore, are also excluded from the last 40 years of advances in operating systems.

In view of the failure of most computer science innovations of the last 40 years to address the needs of aircraft designers, I am astonished at their remarkable safety track record. I have enormous respect for the engineers who design these planes. They are stuck with the prototype-and-test style of design that was used by Edison, unable to leverage the transitivity of models, and their prototypes are much more complex than Edison's prototypes.

Figure 6.4 shows a prototype of an Airbus A350, their newest model. Airbus calls this prototype an「iron wing.」The prototype includes all parts of an A350 except the airframe, cabin, and engines. This is why it doesn't look like an airplane. It is the guts without the skeleton or skin. The wiring is all exactly the same length as on the real aircraft. The hydraulic tubes are bent as on the real aircraft to get around the (missing) airframe structure. When running tests using this prototype, the same generators that are driven by the engines on the real aircraft are driven by artificial engines so that the prototype runs on its own power. This prototype is obviously much more complicated than Edison's lightbulbs, but it is exactly the same sort of concrete prototype.

Figure 6.4

An Airbus「iron wing」prototype of an A350.

Aircraft manufacturers are not alone in facing this problem. Modern cars are mostly「drive-by-wire」today, where the driver commands (pushing on the accelerator and brakes and turning the steering wheel) are mediated by a computer before going to the wheels or engine. Automotive designers face the same problems but with far fewer regulatory constraints. Their problems are only going to get worse as automation increases (lane keeping, automated accident prevention, and fully automated driving).

It doesn't stop there. Any modern factory is computer controlled and is similarly a safety-critical system where the timing of actions is essential to safety. Trains are computer controlled. Ventilation, lighting, and fire mitigation systems in buildings are computer controlled. Modern electric power grids, water distribution systems, and communication systems are computer controlled.

In 2006, Helen Gill of the U.S. National Science Foundation coined the term「cyberphysical systems」(CPS) for such systems that combine computing, networking, and physical dynamics. There is clearly today a crisis of complexity for such systems. She launched a major NSF initiative to fund research to address precisely the problems that I have indicated. This program continues, and progress is being made, albeit still primarily in research labs and not yet in industrial production. Gill recognized that conjoining the「cyber」world with the physical world created an enormous crisis of complexity, one that the existing paradigms were poorly equipped to deal with.

What is the origin of the term「cyber」in CPS? The related term「cyberspace」is attributed to William Gibson, who used the term in the novel Neuromancer , but the roots of the term CPS are older and deeper. It would be more accurate to view the terms「cyberspace」and「cyberphysical systems」as stemming from the same root,「cybernetics,」which was coined by Norbert Wiener (Wiener, 1948), an American mathematician who had a huge impact on the development of control systems theory. During World War II, Wiener pioneered technology for the automatic aiming and firing of anti-aircraft guns. Although the mechanisms he used did not involve digital computers, the principles are similar to those used today in computer-based feedback control systems. His control logic was effectively a computation, albeit one carried out with analog circuits and mechanical parts, and therefore cybernetics is the conjunction of physical processes, computation, and communication. Wiener derived the term from the Greek word for helmsman, governor, pilot, or rudder. The metaphor is apt for control systems.

The term CPS is sometimes confused with「cybersecurity,」which concerns the confidentiality, integrity, and availability of data and has no intrinsic connection with physical processes. The term「cybersecurity,」therefore, is about the security of cyberspace and is thus only indirectly connected to cybernetics. CPS certainly involves many challenging security and privacy concerns, but these are by no means the only concerns.

My own research at Berkeley includes some examples of NSF-funded research projects under the CPS program. One project that concluded in 2015, called the PRET project (for Performance with Repeatable Timing), designed an instruction set architecture that explicitly includes timing within its programming paradigm. In effect, this project reopened decisions that Fred Brooks made all the way back in the 1960s when he designed the System/360 ISA without any explicit control over timing. The project concluded with a demonstration that it is possible to achieve precise control over timing with no loss of performance and modest cost in hardware. If this architectural approach is adopted in industry, it will enable separation of concerns in the layering of figure 3.3 for cyberphysical systems.

A second example from my research group is a project we called PTIDES, which also concluded in 2015. This project addressed software that is distributed across networks, using the OSI model of figure 6.3 , but modifying the paradigms to explicitly control timing. But I will spare you the details.

Despite progress in the research labs, the crisis of complexity remains for cyberphysical systems, and the crisis of opportunity remains for data science. In the remaining chapters, I examine just how far we can push the layering of models. All the techniques we know of today have limitations, and understanding these limitations is essential to a complete understanding of technology revolutions. These limitations hint at opportunities for innovation.

__________

1 Moore was one of the「traitorous eight」who left the Shockley Semiconductor Laboratory to found Fairchild Semiconductor and start Silicon Valley.

2 Douglas Adams described the Babel fish in The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy . According to Adams,「The Babel fish is small, yellow, leech-like, and probably the oddest thing in the universe. It feeds on brain wave energy, absorbing all unconscious frequencies and then excreting telepathically a matrix formed from the conscious frequencies and nerve signals picked up from the speech centres of the brain, the practical upshot of which is that if you stick one in your ear, you can instantly understand anything said to you in any form of language: the speech you hear decodes the brain wave matrix.」

II

Y I N

7

