# 注释

## 01

1. Richard T. Pascale, Linda Gioja, and Mark Millemann, Surfing the Edge of Chaos (New York: Crown Business, 2000), 14.

2. The name Pierre Gerard is a pseudonym. In order to assure anonymity

I used pseudonyms for all participants in my research study. In addition, par ticular details of their lives, such as where they live or where they worked b fore the career change, have been altered

3. Hazel Markus and Paula Nurius, Possible Selves, American Psy- chologist41, no.9 (1986):954-969

4. William Bridges, Transitions: Making Sense of Lifes Changes (Cam bridge, MA: Perseus, 1980)

## 02

1. Richard Nelson Bolles, What Color Is Your Parachute?: A Practical Manual for Job-hunters and Career-changers, 31 st ed (Berkeley, CA: Ten opeed Press, 2000)

2. Perri Capell, " Taking the Painless Path to a New Career, Wall Street Journal Europe, 2 January 2002

3. This dichotomy is based on Gilbert Ryle's famous discussion of the difference between“knowing that”and“knowing how”See Ryle, The Con cept of Mind  (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1949)

4. Edgar H. Schein, Career Anchors: Discovering Your Real Vales, rev ed (San Diego, CA: University Associates, 1990)

5. Donald A. Schon, The Reflective Practitioner: How Professionals Think in Action  (New York: Basic Books, 1983)

6. Ikujiro Nonaka, " A Dynamic Theory of Organizational Knowledge Creation, Organization Science 5, no 1 (1994): 14-37

7. Edgar H. Schein has talked about this as the distinction between planned change”and“managed learning“”in Kurt Lewin' s Change The ory in the Field and in the Classroom: Notes Toward a Model of Managed Learning, "Systems Practice 9, no. 1 (1996): 27-48

8. Henry Mintzberg, "Crafting Strategy, "Harward Business Review 6.5 no.4 (1987):66-75

9. See Richard L Daft and Karl E Weick, "Toward a Model of Orga nizations as Interpretation Systems, Academy of Management Review 9 no. 2 (1984): 284-295, for a discussion of the distinction between discover- ing and creating possibilities

10. Schein, "Kurt Lewins Change Theory in the Field and in the Class-room，”27-48.

11. Daniel J. Levinson, The Seasons ofa Mans Life (New York: Knopf 1985).

12. Robert Kegan, The Evolving Self: Problem and Process in Human Development  (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1982)

13. See, for example, Paul D. Tieger, Barbara Barron-tieger, and Debo rah Baker, Do What You Are: Discover the Perfect Career for You Through the Secrets of Personality Type, 3 d ed  (Boston: Little, Brown, 2001)

14. Anselm L. Strauss, Mirrors and Masks: The Search for Identity  (London: Martin Robertson, 1977), 91

15. Hazel Markus and Paula Nurius, Possible Selves, "American Psy- colonist41, no.9 (1986):954-969.

## 03

1. See William Bridges, Transitions: Making Sense of Lifes Changes  (Cambridge, MA: Perseus, 1980) and Roger L. Gould, Transformations Growuth and Change in Adult Life (New York: Simon Schuster, 1978)

2. Daniel J. Levinson, The Seasons ofa Woman, s Life  (New York: Ran dom House, 1997), 29.

3. Samuel D. Osherson, Holding On and Letting Go: Men and Career Change at Midlife (New York: Free Press, 1980)

4. Helen Rose Fuchs Ebaugh, Becoming an Ex: The Process of Role Exit (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1988), 143

5. Diane Vaughan, Uncoupling-turning Points in Intimate Relation ships  (New York: Vintage Books, 1990)

6. Ebaugh, Becoming an Ex, 110-111

7. Bridges, Transitions, 96-102

8. Harriet Rubin, Soloing: Realizing Your Lifes Ambition, 1 st ed (New York: Harperlnformation, 1999), 31

9. Bridges, Transitions, 114

10. See Herminia Ibarra, Provisional Selves: Experimenting with Image and Identity in Professional Adaptation, Administrative Science Ouarterly 44, no 4  (December 1999): 764-791, and John H. Yost, Michael J. Strube, and James R. Bailey, The Construction of the Self: An Evolution- ary View, Current Psychology 11, no.2 (1992): 110-121

11. Osherson, Holding on and Letting Go

## 04

1. The idea that change results from bold strokes or long marches is orrow ed from Rosabeth M. Kanter, Barry A Stein, and Todd D Jick, The Challenge of Organizational Change: How Companies Experience It and Leaders Guide It  (New York: Free Press, 1992)

2. Karl E. Weick, Small Wins: Redefining the Scale of Social Prob lems, American Psychologist 39, no. 1 (January 1984): 40-49.

3. Elizabeth P. Mckenna, When Work Does Not Work Anymore: Women, Work, and Identity  (New York, Dell, 1998), 161-162

4. Adapted from Edgar H. Schein, Organizational Culture and Leadership, 2 d ed  (San Francisco: Jossey-bass, 1992), 17.

5. Edgar H. Schein, Career Anchors: Discovering Your Real Values, rev. Ed  (San Diego, CA: University Associates, 1990). The original anchors identified by Schein are technical or functional competence, general managerial competence, autonomy/independence, security/stability, entrepreneurial creativity, and pure challenge. Later studies reveal two additional anchors lifestyle and service/dedication to a cause

Once developed through varied experience, Schein finds that anchors do not change much. A person might experiment with different kinds of work or sacrifice temporarily what they love most in order to meet other goals, but fundamentally, once anchors have formed, people tend to rely on them when and if they can, and most career changers wind their way back to settings and activities that allow them to stay tethered to the things they care most deeply about Basic assumptions, however, operate at a deeper level, and define whether we are able to keep our anchors while stripping them of the detritus that can muck up the line.

6. The idea of exposing basic assumptions is similar to the notion of louble-loop" "learning. Chris Argyris and Donald A Schon rganizational Learning: A Theory of Action Perspective  (Reading, MA: Addison-wesley, 1978)

7. Robert Kegan, The Evolving Self: Problem and Process in Human Development (Boston: Harvard University Press, 1982) Kegan argues that adults develop in stages, moving out of aninterpersonal system of making sense, In which others expectations drive our choices, to aninstitut1 ona/>, system, in which we overidentify with organizations and make decisions that might conflict with personal priorities out of an exaggerated sense of duty n his theory the final, most mature stage is the"interdependent"system, in which people and institutions are important to our identity but no longer all- encompassing determinants of it.

## 05

1. Donald A. Schon, The Reflective Practitioner: How Professionals Think in Action  (New York Basic Books, 1983)

2. Adapted from Karl E Weick, The Social Psychology of Organizing, 2 d ed (New York: Mcgraw-hill, 1979)

3. Karl E. Weick cites this as one of the key advantages of the small

wins strategy. See"Small Wins: Redefining the Scale of Social Problems American Psychologist 39, no 1 (January 1984): 40-49.

4. Ibid..43.

5. Hope Dlugozima, James Scott, and David Sharp, Six Months Off: How to Plan, Negotiate, and Take the Break You Need without Burning Bridges or Going Broke (New York: Henry Holt, 1996); Joshua White and Susan Griffith Taking a Career Break  (Oxford, UK: Vacation Work Publications, 2001)

6. James G. March, The Technology of Foolishness, "in Ambiguity and Choice in Organizations, ed. James G. March and Johan Olsen (Bergen Universitetsforlaget, 1972)

7. Max H Bazerman, Ann E. Tenbrunsel, and Kimberly Wade-benzoni Negotiating with Yourself and Losing: Making Decisions with Competing Internal Preferences, Academy of Management Review 23, no. 2 (Apri

1998):225-241.

8. Ibid

9. Antonio R. Damasio. Descartes'error: Emotion. Reason and the

Human Brain  (New York: Avon, 1995)

10. Adam Phillips, On Flirtation (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University

Press, 1994), xvii

11. Barry M. Staw, Lance E. Sandelands, and Jane E. Dutton, " Threat Rigidity Effects in Organizational Behavior: A Multilevel Analysis. "Admin istrative Science Ouarterly 26, no4 (1981): 501-524.

## 06

1. Robert J. Lifton, The Protean Self: Human Resilience in an Age of Fragmentation  (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1993), 120.

2. Mark S. Granovetter, The Strength of Weak Ties, "American Jour nal of Sociology 78, no 6 (1973): 1360-1380; and Getting a Job: A Study in Contacts and Careers, 2 d ed  (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1995) Many of the"weak ties "activated by Granovetter's job hunters were con nections developed earlier in their careers that had been dormant

3. A relatively large fraction of job changes are made without a highly active search, and often without any explicit search at all, via informal net works. Apart from personal referrals, the two other most successful job change methods are applying via a headhunter and building on previous ex- perience as an independent contractor for the firm. See Peter V. Marsden and Elizabeth H. Gorman, "Social Networks, Job Changes, and Recruitment, in Sourcebook on Labor Markets: Evolving Structures and Processes, eds Ivar E. Berg and Arne L. Kalleberg  (New York: Kluwer Academic/Plenum Publishers, 2001), 467-502

4. Roy F. Baumeister, Identity: Cultural Change and the Struggle for Self (New York: Oxford University Press, 1986)

5. For a thorough review of research on how relationships help to buffer or change self-conceptions, see Roy F. Baumeister, "The Self, in The Handbook of Social Psychology, eds. Daniel T. Gilbert, Susan T. Fiske, and Lindzey Gardner (New York: Mcgraw Hill, 1998), 702-703

6. Malcolm Gladwell, The Tipping Point: How Little Things Can Make a Big Difference (Boston: Little, Brown, 2000)

7. For a"biased scanning "theory of self-concept change, see Edward E. Jones, Frederick Rhodewalt, Steven Berglas, and James A. Skelton, " Ef

fects of Strategic Self-presentation on Subsequent Self-esteem, "Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 41, no. 3 (1981): 407-421. This line of research is reviewed in Baumeister. The Self.>680-740

8. Yale psychologist Daniel J. Levinson discusses the important role of transitional figures "in The Seasons ofa Mans Life (New York: Knopf, 1985)

9. Ibid..91.

10. Anselm L. Strauss, Mirrors and Masks: The Search for Identit London: Martin Robertson, 1977), 110-111

11. Etienne Wenger, Communities of Practice: Learning, Meaning, and Identity (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 1998); Jean Lave and Etienne Wenger, Situated Learning: Legitimate Peripheral Participation (C a bridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 1991)

12. William Bridges, "Cool Friends, interview by Erik Hansen, 15 September2000, <www. Tompeters. Com>. Reprintedbypermissionoftom peters. Com. For more information, please visit the Web site.

13. For a recent review of socialization research. See Herminia Ibarra

Provisional Selves: Experimenting with Image and Identity in Professional Adaptation, "Administrative Science Ouarterly 44, no 4 (December 1999) 764-791. For a discussion of the need to make sense of surprising occur rences, see Meryl Reis Luis, "Surprise and Sense Making: What Newcomers Experience in Entering Unfamiliar Organizational Settings, "Administrative Science Quarterly 25, no. 2 (1980): 226-251

14. Erving Goffman, "The Nature of Deference and Demeanor American Anthropologist 58, no. 3 (1956): 473-502

15. Edgar H. Schein, "Kurt Lewins Change The eory In the Fleld and In the Classroom: Notes Toward a Model of Managed Learning, "Systems Practice9, no.1 (1996):27-48.

16. John Bowlby, A Secure Base: Parent-child Attachment and Healthy Human Development (New York, Basic Books, 1988)

17. Donald W. Winnicott, Playing and Reality (New York: Routledge 1989)

18. John Bowlby, "Self-reliance and Some Conditions That Promote It, "in Support, Innovation and Autonomy, ed R. H. Gosling (London: Tavi stock, 1973), 23-48. Cited in William A Kahn, "Secure Base Relationships at Work, " in The Career Is Dead--long Live the Career: A Relational Ap- proach to Careers, ed. Douglas T. Hall (San Francisco: Jossey-bass, 1996) 158-179.

## 07

1. Karl E. Weick, The Social Psychology of Organizing, 2 d ed (New York MCGRAW-HILL, 1979)

2. Dan P. Mcadams, The Stories We Live By: Personal Myths and the Making of the Self, 1 st ed  (New York: Guildford Publications, 1997), and Power Intimacy and the Life Story: Personological Inquiries into Identity (New York: Guildford Publications, 1988)

3. Charles B Handy, The Age of Unreason (Boston: Harvard Business School Press, 1990)

4. Nicholson Baker, The Size of Thoughts: Essays and Other Lumber  (New York: Random House, 1996), 4.

5. Joseph L. Badaracco, Defining Moments: When Managers Must Choose between Right and Right  (Boston: Harvard Business School Press

1997), S8-61

6. Ellen J. Langer and Alison I. Piper, " The Prevention of Mindless- ness, "Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 53, n. 2 (1987) 280-287; Meryl Reis Louis and Robert Sutton, "Switching Cognitive Gears From Habits of Mind to Active Thinking, Human Relations 44, no. 1  (1991): S5-76.

7. Kenneth J Gergen, Realities and Relationships: Soundings in Social Construction (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1997)

8. Baker, The Size of Thoughts, 7

9. Edgar H. Schein, "Kurt Lewins Change Theory in the Field and in the Classroom: Notes Toward a Model of Managed Learning. "Systems Practice9, no.1 (1996):27-48.

10. David A Jopling, Self-knowuledge and the Self (New York: Rout- ledge. 2000 i

11. Manfred F R. Kets de Vries, The Leadership Mystique: A Users Manual for the Human Enterprise (London: Financial Times/Prentice Hall,

2001),182.

12. Arthur Koestler, The Act of Creation (London: Arkana, 1989), 113 13. Ibid..112 14. Ibid..108.

15. Teresa M. Amabile, Creativity in Context: Update to the Social Psy chology of Creatiuity  (Boulder, CO: Westview Press, 1996), 83

16. In his work on leadership and corporate transformation, Harvard Kennedy School of Government professor Ronald Heifetz finds that successful hange requires frenetic activity" on the dance floor" (such as crafting exper iments, shifting connections, combined with a more distant observation and re flection from the"balcony abovc. Ronald A Hcifctz, Leadership Without Easy Answers (Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, 1994)

17. Koestler, The Act of Creation

18. According to a U. S. National poll conducted by Bruskin and Associ- atcs, closc to seven out of ten pcople with incomes of morc than $40,000 pcr Year fantasize about taking a few months off, and one out of five thirty-five to thirty-nine-year-olds fantasize about it daily. Reported in Hope Dlugoz ima, James Scott, and David Sharp, Six Months Off: How to Plan, Negoti ate, and Take the Break You Need without Burning Bridges or Going Broke  (New York: Henry Holt, 1996), 2

19. Nancy Staudenmayer, Marcie J. Tyre, and Leslie Perlow, "Time to Change: Temporal Shifts as Enablers of Organizational Change, Organiza tional Science, forthcoming  (fall 2002)

20. Marcie J Tyre and Wanda Orlikowski, "Windows of Opportunity Organization Science 5, no 1 (1994); Connie J. G Gersick, Making Time Predictable Transitions in Task Groups, Academy of Management Journa 32, no.2 (1989):274-309.

21. John J. Gabarro, The Dynamics of Taking Charge  (Boston: Har vard Business School Press, 1986)

22. Daniel J. Levinson, The Seasons of a Mans Life (New York: Knopf 1985)

23. Gergen, Realities and Relationships.

## 08

1. Carl R. Rogers, On Becoming a Person (New York: Houghton Mif-

fin. 1961

2. For recent business press accounts of these trends, see David Baker, A Good Time to Step Back from the Old Routine, "Financial Times, 19 November 2001: Alison Maitland. Trouble for the Problem-solvers. Finan- cial Times, 9 November 2000; Carol Hymowitz, Midlife Career Shift: In vestment Banker Prefers a Pulpit, Wall Street Journal, 13 June 2001; and Astrid Wendlandt, "Making the Most of Mid-life Melancholia, Financial Times. 24 November 2000

3. Hope Dlugozima, James Scott, and David Sharp interviewed 200 working Americans who took between two months and two years off from work. See Six Months Off: How to Plan, Negotiate, and Take the Break You Need without Burning Bridges or Going Broke (New York: Henry Holt, 1996),154.

4. Samuel D. Osherson, Holding on and Letting Go: Men and Career Change at Midlife (New York: Free Press, 1980)

5. Daniel J. Levinson, The Seasons of a Mans Life (New York: Knopf, 1985). See also Manfred Kets De Vries, Struggling with the Demon: Perspec tives on Individual and Organizational Irrationality  (Madison, CT: Psy-

chosocial Press, 2001), 95-119

6. Erik H. Erikson, Identity and the Life Cycle, Psychological Issues 1, S9-100.

## 附录

1. Classic studies include Edgar H. Schein, Career Dynamics: Matching Individual and Organizational Needs (Reading, MA: Addison-wesley, 1978) George E. Vaillant, Adaptation to Life  (New York: Little, Brown, 1977) Samuel D. Osherson, Holding On and Letting Go: Men and Career Change at Midlife  (New York: Free Press, 1980); Roger L. Gould, Transformations: Growth and Change in Adalt Life (New York: Simon & Schuster, 1979) Robert W. White, Lives in Progress, 2 d ed (New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 1966); and Douglas T Hall, Careers in Organizations: Individual Planning and Organizational Development (Pacific Palisades, CA: Goodyear Publishing, 1976)

2. For exceptions, see Douglas T. Hall, " Breaking Career Routines Mid-career Choice and Identity Development, in Career Develotment in Organizations, ed. Douglas T Hall (San Francisco: Jossey-bass, 1986); and Osherson, Holding On and Letting Go

3. See, for example, Michael B. Arthur and Denise M. Rousseau, eds The Boundaryless Career: A New Employment Principle for a New Organi zational Era  (New York: Oxford University Press, 2001); Michael B. Arthur, Kerr Inkson, and Judith K Pringle, The New Careers: Individual Action and Economic Change (Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications, 1999) Douglas T Hall, ed, The Career Is Dead Long Live the Career: A Relational Approach to Careers  (San Francisco: Jossey-bass, 1996) and Career Development in Organiations; Charles B Handy, The Age of Unreason  (Boston: Harvard Business School Press, 1990) and The Hungry Spirit: Beyond Capitalism: A Ouest for Purpose in the Modern World  (New York: Arrow Books, 1998) Elizabeth P. Mckenna, When Work Does Not Work Anymore: Women, Work and Identity (New York: Dell Publishing, 1998)

4. On experiential learning, see for example David A Kolb and Mark S Plovnick, "The Experiential Learning Theory of Career Development, " in Organizational Careers: Some New Perspectives, ed. John Van Maanen New York: Wiley, 1976), 65-87. On identity as possibility, see Haze. Markus and Paula Nurius, " Possible Selves, "American Psychologist 41, no 9 (1986):954-969.

5. Edgar H. Schein, The Individual, the Organization, and the Career: A Conceptual Scheme, " Journal of Applied Behavioral Science 7, no.4 (1971) 401-426.

6. While most researchers would agree that our social selves change a lot and that basic personality does not, there remains much disagreement on the cxtent of identity changc. Schcin's work, for cxample, indicates that carccr anchors "do not change much by midcareer, even in the face of dramatic ex- ternal change. In his studies (see Edgar H. Schein, Career Anchors Discover ing Your Real Values, rev. Ed  [San Diego, CA: University Associates, 1990) he finds that major changes are the result of a work situation that no longer a llows or rewards the dispositions, values, and preferences that brought the person there in the first place. A different school of thought, however, holds that changes in the individual himself or herself are equally important mo tives for career change. Researchers in this camp show that values and pref erences can and do change as a result of an individual's own maturation and personality development, reducing the "fit in the old work situation  (see for example Kolb and Plovnick, "The Experiential Learning Theory of Career Devclopmcnt"; and Osherson, Holding On and Letting Go)

7. See Karl E Weick, Ihe Social Psychology of Organizing, 2 d ed  (New York: Mcgraw-hill, 1979); John H. Yost, Michael J. Strube, and James R Bailey, "The Construction of the Self: An Evolutionary View, "Current Psy chology11, no.2 (1992):110-121.

8. Adam Bryant, "Theyre Rich  (And You Are Not), "Newsweek, 5 July 1999,34-41

9. Hall defined midcareer as ages 35 to 50 for a person with a tradi- tional, uninterrupted career, that is, someone starting work at age 21 and re tiring at 65. He notes that for a person with an early start or an interrupted delayed career, the middle could come at quite a different point. Hall, Ca- reer Develobment in Organizations, 125

10. Schein, Career Dynamics: Matching Individual and Organizational eet

11. See Kathleen M. Eisenhardt, "Building Theories from Case Study

Research, "Academy of Management Review 14, no 4 (1989) 532-5.50 and Barney G. Glaser and Anselm L. Strauss, The Discovery of Grounded Theory: Strategies for Oualitative Research  (London: Wiedenfeld Ni son,1967)

12. Robert I Sutton, " Maintaining Norms about Expressed Emotions: The Case of Bill Collectors, "Administrative Science Ouarterly 36, no. 2(1991):245-268.

