## 记忆时间

## 目录

0101 Peering through the Eyepiece of Randomness

0201 The Laws of Truths and Half-Truths

## 0101. Peering through the Eyepiece of Randomness

I remember, as a teenager, watching the yellow flame of the Sabbath candles dancing randomly above the white paraffin cylinders that fueled them. I was too young to think candlelight romantic, but still I found it magical — because of the flickering images created by the fire. They shifted and morphed, grew and waned, all without apparent cause or plan. Surely, I believed, there must be rhyme and reason underlying the flame, some pattern that scientists could predict and explain with their mathematical equations.「Life isn’t like that,」my father told me.「Sometimes things happen that cannot be foreseen.」He told me of the time when, in Buchenwald, the Nazi concentration camp in which he was imprisoned and starving, he stole a loaf of bread from the bakery. The baker had the Gestapo gather everyone who might have committed the crime and line the suspects up.「Who stole the bread?」the baker asked. When no one answered, he told the guards to shoot the suspects one by one until either they were all dead or someone confessed. My father stepped forward to spare the others. He did not try to paint himself in a heroic light but told me that he did it because he expected to be shot either way. Instead of having him killed, though, the baker gave my father a plum job, as his assistant.「A chance event,」my father said.「It had nothing to do with you, but had it happened differently, you would never have been born.」It struck me then that I have Hitler to thank for my existence, for the Germans had killed my father’s wife and two young children, erasing his prior life. And so were it not for the war, my father would never have emigrated to New York, never have met my mother, also a refugee, and never have produced me and my two brothers.

My father rarely spoke of the war. I didn’t realize it then, but years later it dawned on me that whenever he shared his ordeals, it was not so much because he wanted me to know of his experiences but rather because he wanted to impart a larger lesson about life. War is an extreme circumstance, but the role of chance in our lives is not predicated on extremes. The outline of our lives, like the candle’s flame, is continuously coaxed in new directions by a variety of random events that, along with our responses to them, determine our fate. As a result, life is both hard to predict and hard to interpret. Just as, looking at a Rorschach blot, you might see Madonna and I, a duck-billed platypus, the data we encounter in business, law, medicine, sports, the media, or your child’s third-grade report card can be read in many ways. Yet interpreting the role of chance in an event is not like intepreting a Rorschach blot; there are right ways and wrong ways to do it.

We often employ intuitive processes when we make assessments and choices in uncertain situations. Those processes no doubt carried an evolutionary advantage when we had to decide whether a saber-toothed tiger was smiling because it was fat and happy or because it was famished and saw us as its next meal. But the modern world has a different balance, and today those intuitive processes come with drawbacks. When we use our habitual ways of thinking to deal with today’s tigers, we can be led to decisions that are less than optimal or even incongruous. That conclusion comes as no surprise to those who study how the brain processes uncertainty: many studies point to a close connection between the parts of our brain that make assessments of chance situations and those that handle the human characteristic that is often considered our prime source of irrationality — our emotions. Functional magnetic resonance imaging, for example, shows that risk and reward are assessed by parts of the dopaminergic system, a brain-reward circuit important for motivational and emotional processes.1 The images show, too, that the amygdala, which is also linked to our emotional state, especially fear, is activated when we make decisions couched in uncertainty.2

The mechanisms by which people analyze situations involving chance are an intricate product of evolutionary factors, brain structure, personal experience, knowledge, and emotion. In fact, the human response to uncertainty is so complex that sometimes different structures within the brain come to different conclusions and apparently fight it out to determine which one will dominate. For example, if your face swells to five times its normal size three out of every four times you eat shrimp, the「logical」left hemisphere of your brain will attempt to find a pattern. The「intuitive」right hemisphere of your brain, on the other hand, will simply say「avoid shrimp.」At least that’s what researchers found in less painful experimental setups. The game is called probability guessing. In lieu of toying with shrimp and histamine, subjects are shown a series of cards or lights, which can have two colors, say green and red. Things are arranged so that the colors will appear with different probabilities but otherwise without a pattern. For example, red might appear twice as often as green in a sequence like red-red-green-red-green-red-red-green-green-red-red-red, and so on. The task of the subject, after watching for a while, is to predict whether each new member of the sequence will be red or green.

The game has two basic strategies. One is to always guess the color that you notice occurs more frequently. That is the route favored by rats and other nonhuman animals. If you employ this strategy, you are guaranteed a certain degree of success but you are also conceding that you will do no better. For instance, if green shows up 75 percent of the time and you decide to always guess green, you will be correct 75 percent of the time. The other strategy is to「match」your proportion of green and red guesses to the proportion of green and red you observed in the past. If the greens and reds appear in a pattern and you can figure out the pattern, this strategy enables you to guess right every time. But if the colors appear at random, you would be better off sticking with the first strategy. In the case where green randomly appears 75 percent of the time, the second strategy will lead to the correct guess only about 6 times in 10.

Humans usually try to guess the pattern, and in the process we allow ourselves to be outperformed by a rat. But there are people with certain types of post-surgical brain impairment — called a split brain — that precludes the right and left hemispheres of the brain from communicating with each other. If the probability experiment is performed on these patients such that they see the colored light or card with only their left eye and employ only their left hand to signal their predictions, it amounts to an experiment on the right side of the brain. But if the experiment is performed so as to involve only their right eye and right hand, it is an experiment on the left brain. When researchers performed those experiments, they found that — in the same patients — the right hemisphere always chose to guess the more frequent color and the left hemisphere always tried to guess the pattern.3

Making wise assessments and choices in the face of uncertainty is a rare skill. But like any skill, it can be improved with experience. In the pages that follow, I will examine the role of chance in the world around us, the ideas that have been developed over the centuries to help us understand that role, and the factors that often lead us astray. The British philosopher and mathematician Bertrand Russell wrote,

We all start from「naive realism,」i.e., the doctrine that things are what they seem. We think that grass is green, that stones are hard, and that snow is cold. But physics assures us that the greenness of grass, the hardness of stones, and the coldness of snow are not the greenness of grass, the hardness of stones, and the coldness of snow that we know in our own experience, but something very different.4 In what follows we will peer at life through the eyepiece of randomness and see that many of the events of our lives, too, are not quite what they seem but rather something very different.

IN 2002 THE NOBEL COMMITTEE awarded the Nobel Prize in Economics to a scientist named Daniel Kahneman. Economists do all sorts of things these days — they explain why teachers are paid so little, why football teams are worth so much, and why bodily functions help set a limit on the size of hog farms (a hog excretes three to five times as much as a human, so a farm with thousands of hogs on it often produces more waste than the neighboring cities).5 Despite all the great research generated by economists, the 2002 Nobel Prize was notable because Kahneman is not an economist. He is a psychologist, and for decades, with the late Amos Tversky, Kahneman studied and clarified the kinds of misperceptions of randomness that fuel many of the common fallacies I will talk about in this book.

The greatest challenge in understanding the role of randomness in life is that although the basic principles of randomness arise from everyday logic, many of the consequences that follow from those principles prove counterintuitive. Kahneman and Tversky’s studies were themselves spurred by a random event. In the mid-1960s, Kahneman, then a junior psychology professor at Hebrew University, agreed to perform a rather unexciting chore: lecturing to a group of Israeli air force flight instructors on the conventional wisdom of behavior modification and its application to the psychology of flight training. Kahneman drove home the point that rewarding positive behavior works but punishing mistakes does not. One of his students interrupted, voicing an opinion that would lead Kahneman to an epiphany and guide his research for decades.6

「I’ve often praised people warmly for beautifully executed maneuvers, and the next time they always do worse,」the flight instructor said.「And I’ve screamed at people for badly executed maneuvers, and by and large the next time they improve. Don’t tell me that reward works and punishment doesn’t work. My experience contradicts it.」The other flight instructors agreed. To Kahneman the flight instructors’ experiences rang true. On the other hand, Kahneman believed in the animal experiments that demonstrated that reward works better than punishment. He ruminated on this apparent paradox. And then it struck him: the screaming preceded the improvement, but contrary to appearances it did not cause it.

How can that be? The answer lies in a phenomenon called regression toward the mean. That is, in any series of random events an extraordinary event is most likely to be followed, due purely to chance, by a more ordinary one. Here is how it works: The student pilots all had a certain personal ability to fly fighter planes. Raising their skill level involved many factors and required extensive practice, so although their skill was slowly improving through flight training, the change wouldn’t be noticeable from one maneuver to the next. Any especially good or especially poor performance was thus mostly a matter of luck. So if a pilot made an exceptionally good landing — one far above his normal level of performance — then the odds would be good that he would perform closer to his norm — that is, worse — the next day. And if his instructor had praised him, it would appear that the praise had done no good. But if a pilot made an exceptionally bad landing — running the plane off the end of the runway and into the vat of corn chowder in the base cafeteria — then the odds would be good that the next day he would perform closer to his norm — that is, better. And if his instructor had a habit of screaming「you clumsy ape」when a student performed poorly, it would appear that his criticism did some good. In this way an apparent pattern would emerge: student performs well, praise does no good; student performs poorly, instructor compares student to lower primate at high volume, student improves. The instructors in Kahneman’s class had concluded from such experiences that their screaming was a powerful educational tool. In reality it made no difference at all.

This error in intuition spurred Kahneman’s thinking. He wondered, are such misconceptions universal? Do we, like the flight instructors, believe that harsh criticism improves our children’s behavior or our employees’ performance? Do we make other misjudgments when faced with uncertainty? Kahneman knew that human beings, by necessity, employ certain strategies to reduce the complexity of tasks of judgment and that intuition about probabilities plays an important part in that process. Will you feel sick after eating that luscious-looking seviche tostada from the street vendor? You don’t consciously recall all the comparable food stands you’ve patronized, count the number of times you’ve spent the following night guzzling Pepto-Bismol, and come up with a numerical estimate. You let your intuition do the work. But research in the 1950s and early ’60s indicated that people’s intuition about randomness fails them in such situations. How widespread, Kahneman wondered, was this misunderstanding of uncertainty? And what are its implications for human decision making? A few years passed, and Kahneman invited a fellow junior professor, Amos Tversky, to give a guest lecture at one of his seminars. Later, at lunch, Kahneman mentioned his developing ideas to Tversky. Over the next thirty years, Tversky and Kahneman found that even among sophisticated subjects, when it came to random processes — whether in military or sports situations, business quandaries, or medical questions — people’s beliefs and intuition very often let them down.

Suppose four publishers have rejected the manuscript for your thriller about love, war, and global warming. Your intuition and the bad feeling in the pit of your stomach might say that the rejections by all those publishing experts mean your manuscript is no good. But is your intuition correct? Is your novel unsellable? We all know from experience that if several tosses of a coin come up heads, it doesn’t mean we are tossing a two-headed coin. Could it be that publishing success is so unpredictable that even if our novel is destined for the best-seller list, numerous publishers could miss the point and send those letters that say thanks but no thanks? One book in the 1950s was rejected by publishers, who responded with such comments as「very dull,」「a dreary record of typical family bickering, petty annoyances and adolescent emotions,」and「even if the work had come to light five years ago, when the subject [World War II] was timely, I don’t see that there would have been a chance for it.」That book, The Diary of a Young Girl by Anne Frank, has sold 30 million copies, making it one of the best-selling books in history. Rejection letters were also sent to Sylvia Plath because「there certainly isn’t enough genuine talent for us to take notice,」to George Orwell for Animal Farm because「it is impossible to sell animal stories in the U.S.,」and to Isaac Bashevis Singer because「it’s Poland and the rich Jews again.」Before he hit it big, Tony Hillerman’s agent dumped him, advising that he should「get rid of all that Indian stuff.」7

Those were not isolated misjudgments. In fact, many books destined for great success had to survive not just rejection, but repeated rejection. For example, few books today are considered to have more obvious and nearly universal appeal than the works of John Grisham, Theodor Geisel (Dr. Seuss), and J. K. Rowling. Yet the manuscripts they wrote before they became famous — all eventually hugely successful — were all repeatedly rejected. John Grisham’s manuscript for A Time to Kill was rejected by twenty-six publishers; his second manuscript, for The Firm, drew interest from publishers only after a bootleg copy circulating in Hollywood drew a `$`600,000 offer for the movie rights. Dr. Seuss’s first children’s book, And to Think That I Saw It on Mulberry Street, was rejected by twenty-seven publishers. And J. K. Rowling’s first Harry Potter manuscript was rejected by nine.8 Then there is the other side of the coin — the side anyone in the business knows all too well: the many authors who had great potential but never made it, John Grishams who quit after the first twenty rejections or J. K. Rowlings who gave up after the first five. After his many rejections, one such writer, John Kennedy Toole, lost hope of ever getting his novel published and committed suicide. His mother persevered, however, and eleven years later A Confederacy of Dunces was published; it won the Pulitzer Prize for Fiction and has sold nearly 2 million copies.

There exists a vast gulf of randomness and uncertainty between the creation of a great novel — or piece of jewelry or chocolate-chip cookie — and the presence of huge stacks of that novel — or jewelry or bags of cookies — at the front of thousands of retail outlets. That’s why successful people in every field are almost universally members of a certain set — the set of people who don’t give up.

A lot of what happens to us — success in our careers, in our investments, and in our life decisions, both major and minor — is as much the result of random factors as the result of skill, preparedness, and hard work. So the reality that we perceive is not a direct reflection of the people or circumstances that underlie it but is instead an image blurred by the randomizing effects of unforeseeable or fluctuating external forces. That is not to say that ability doesn’t matter — it is one of the factors that increase the chances of success — but the connection between actions and results is not as direct as we might like to believe. Thus our past is not so easy to understand, nor is our future so easy to predict, and in both enterprises we benefit from looking beyond the superficial explanations.

We habitually underestimate the effects of randomness. Our stockbroker recommends that we invest in the Latin American mutual fund that「beat the pants off the domestic funds」five years running. Our doctor attributes that increase in our triglycerides to our new habit of enjoying a Hostess Ding Dong with milk every morning after dutifully feeding the kids a breakfast of mangoes and nonfat yogurt. We may or may not take our stockbroker’s or doctor’s advice, but few of us question whether he or she has enough data to give it. In the political world, the economic world, the business world — even when careers and millions of dollars are at stake — chance events are often conspicuously misinterpreted as accomplishments or failures.

Hollywood provides a nice illustration. Are the rewards (and punishments) of the Hollywood game deserved, or does luck play a far more important role in box office success (and failure) than people imagine? We all understand that genius doesn’t guarantee success, but it’s seductive to assume that success must come from genius. Yet the idea that no one can know in advance whether a film will hit or miss has been an uncomfortable suspicion in Hollywood at least since the novelist and screenwriter William Goldman enunciated it in his classic 1983 book Adventures in the Screen Trade. In that book, Goldman quoted the former studio executive David Picker as saying,「If I had said yes to all the projects I turned down, and no to all the other ones I took, it would have worked out about the same.」9

That’s not to say that a jittery homemade horror video could become a hit just as easily as, say, Exorcist: The Beginning, which cost an estimated `$`80 million. Well, actually, that is what happened some years back with The Blair Witch Project: it cost the filmmakers a mere `$`60,000 but brought in `$`140 million in domestic box office revenue — more than three times the business of Exorcist. Still, that’s not what Goldman was saying. He was referring only to professionally made Hollywood films with production values good enough to land the film a respectable distributor. And Goldman didn’t deny that there are reasons for a film’s box office performance. But he did say that those reasons are so complex and the path from green light to opening weekend so vulnerable to unforeseeable and uncontrollable influences that educated guesses about an unmade film’s potential aren’t much better than flips of a coin.

Examples of Hollywood’s unpredictability are easy to find. Movie buffs will remember the great expectations the studios had for the megaflops Ishtar (Warren Beatty + Dustin Hoffman + a `$`55 million budget = `$`14 million in box office revenue) and Last Action Hero (Arnold Schwarzenegger + `$`85 million = `$`50 million). On the other hand, you might recall the grave doubts that executives at Universal Studios had about the young director George Lucas’s film American Graffiti, shot for less than `$`1 million. Despite their skepticism, it took in `$`115 million, but still that didn’t stop them from having even graver doubts about Lucas’s next idea. He called the story Adventures of Luke Starkiller as taken from「The Journal of the Whills.」Universal called it unproducible. Ultimately 20th Century Fox made the film, but the studio’s faith in the project went only so far: it paid Lucas just `$`200,000 to write and direct it; in exchange, Lucas received the sequel and merchandising rights. In the end, Star Wars took in `$`461 million on a budget of `$`13 million, and Lucas had himself an empire.

Given the fact that green light decisions are made years before a film is completed and films are subject to many unpredictable factors that arise during those years of production and marketing, not to mention the inscrutable tastes of the audience, Goldman’s theory doesn’t seem at all far-fetched. (It is also one that is supported by much recent economic research.)10 Despite all this, studio executives are not judged by the bread-and-butter management skills that are as essential to the head of the United States Steel Corporation as they are to the head of Paramount Pictures. Instead, they are judged by their ability to pick hits. If Goldman is right, that ability is mere illusion, and in spite of his or her swagger no executive is worth that `$`25 million contract.

Deciding just how much of an outcome is due to skill and how much to luck is not a no-brainer. Random events often come like the raisins in a box of cereal — in groups, streaks, and clusters. And although Fortune is fair in potentialities, she is not fair in outcomes. That means that if each of 10 Hollywood executives tosses 10 coins, although each has an equal chance of being the winner or the loser, in the end there will be winners and losers. In this example, the chances are 2 out of 3 that at least 1 of the executives will score 8 or more heads or tails.

Imagine that George Lucas makes a new Star Wars film and in one test market decides to perform a crazy experiment. He releases the identical film under two titles: Star Wars: Episode A and Star Wars: Episode B. Each film has its own marketing campaign and distribution schedule, with the corresponding details identical except that the trailers and ads for one film say Episode A and those for the other, Episode B. Now we make a contest out of it. Which film will be more popular? Say we look at the first 20,000 moviegoers and record the film they choose to see (ignoring those die-hard fans who will go to both and then insist there were subtle but meaningful differences between the two). Since the films and their marketing campaigns are identical, we can mathematically model the game this way: Imagine lining up all the viewers in a row and flipping a coin for each viewer in turn. If the coin lands heads up, he or she sees Episode A; if the coin lands tails up, it’s Episode B. Because the coin has an equal chance of coming up either way, you might think that in this experimental box office war each film should be in the lead about half the time. But the mathematics of randomness says otherwise: the most probable number of changes in the lead is 0, and it is 88 times more probable that one of the two films will lead through all 20,000 customers than it is that, say, the lead continuously seesaws.11 The lesson is not that there is no difference between films but that some films will do better than others even if all the films are identical.

Such issues are not discussed in corporate boardrooms, in Hollywood, or elsewhere, and so the typical patterns of randomness — apparent hot or cold streaks or the bunching of data into clusters — are routinely misinterpreted and, worse, acted on as if they represented a new trend.

One of the most high profile examples of anointment and regicide in modern Hollywood was the case of Sherry Lansing, who ran Paramount with great success for many years.12 Under Lansing, Paramount won Best Picture awards for Forrest Gump, Braveheart, and Titanic and posted its two highest-grossing years ever. Then Lansing’s reputation suddenly plunged, and she was dumped after Paramount experienced, as Variety put it,「a long stretch of underperformance at the box office.」13

In mathematical terms there is both a short and a long explanation for Lansing’s fate. First, the short answer. Look at this series of percentages: 11.4, 10.6, 11.3, 7.4, 7.1, 6.7. Notice something? Lansing’s boss, Sumner Redstone, did too, and for him the trend was significant, for those six numbers represented the market share of Paramount’s Motion Picture Group for the final six years of Lansing’s tenure. The trend caused BusinessWeek to speculate that Lansing「may simply no longer have Hollywood’s hot hand.」14 Soon Lansing announced she was leaving, and a few months later a talent manager named Brad Grey was brought on board.

How can a surefire genius lead a company through seven great years and then fail practically overnight? There were plenty of theories explaining Lansing’s early success. While Paramount was doing well, Lansing was praised for making it one of Hollywood’s best-run studios and for her knack for turning conventional stories into `$`100 million hits. When her fortune changed, the revisionists took over. Her penchant for making successful remakes and sequels became a drawback. Most damning of all, perhaps, was the notion that her failure was due to her「middle-of-the-road tastes.」She was now blamed for green-lighting such box office dogs as Timeline and Lara Croft Tomb Raider: The Cradle of Life. Suddenly the conventional wisdom was that Lansing was risk averse, old-fashioned, and out of touch with the trends. But can she really be blamed for thinking that a Michael Crichton bestseller would be promising movie fodder? And where were all the Lara Croft critics when the first Tomb Raider film took in `$`131 million in box office revenue?

Even if the theories of Lansing’s shortcomings were plausible, consider how abruptly her demise occurred. Did she become risk averse and out of touch overnight? Because Paramount’s market share plunged that suddenly. One year Lansing was flying high; the next she was a punch line for late-night comedians. Her change of fortune might have been understandable if, like others in Hollywood, she had become depressed over a nasty divorce proceeding, had been charged with embezzlement, or had joined a religious cult. That was not the case. And she certainly hadn’t sustained any damage to her cerebral cortex. The only evidence of Lansing’s newly developed failings that her critics could offer was, in fact, her newly developed failings.

In hindsight it is clear that Lansing was fired because of the industry’s misunderstanding of randomness and not because of her flawed decision making: Paramount’s films for the following year were already in the pipeline when Lansing left the company. So if we want to know roughly how Lansing would have done in some parallel universe in which she remained in her job, all we need to do is look at the data in the year following her departure. With such films as War of the Worlds and The Longest Yard, Paramount had its best summer in a decade and saw its market share rebound to nearly 10 percent. That isn’t merely ironic — it’s again that aspect of randomness called regression toward the mean. A Variety headline on the subject read,「Parting Gifts: Old Regime’s Pics Fuel Paramount Rebound,」15 but one can’t help but think that had Viacom (Paramount’s parent company) had more patience, the headline might have read,「Banner Year Puts Paramount and Lansing’s Career Back on Track.」

Sherry Lansing had good luck at the beginning and bad luck at the end, but it could have been worse. She could have had her bad luck at the beginning. That’s what happened to a Columbia Pictures chief named Mark Canton. Described as box office savvy and enthusiastic shortly after he was hired, he was fired after his first few years produced disappointing box office results. Criticized by one unnamed colleague for being「incapable of distinguishing the winners from the losers」and by another for being「too busy cheerleading,」this disgraced man left in the pipeline when he departed such films as Men in Black (`$`589 million in worldwide box office revenue), Air Force One (`$`315 million), The Fifth Element (`$`264 million), Jerry Maguire (`$`274 million), and Anaconda (`$`137 million). As Variety put it, Canton’s legacy pictures「hit and hit big.」16

Well, that’s Hollywood, a town where Michael Ovitz works as Disney president for fifteen months and then leaves with a `$`140 million severance package and where the studio head David Begelman is fired by Columbia Pictures for forgery and embezzlement and then is hired a few years later as CEO of MGM. But as we’ll see in the following chapters, the same sort of misjudgments that plague Hollywood also plague people’s perceptions in all realms of life.

MY OWN EPIPHANY regarding the hidden effects of randomness came in college, when I took a course in probability and began applying its principles to the sports world. That is easy to do because, as in the film business, most accomplishments in sports are easily quantified and the data are readily available. What I discovered was that just as the lessons of persistence, practice, and teamwork that we learn from sports apply equally to all endeavors of life, so do the lessons of randomness. And so I set out to examine a tale of two baseball sluggers, Roger Maris and Mickey Mantle, a tale that bears a lesson for all of us, even those who wouldn’t know a baseball from a Ping-Pong ball.

The year was 1961. I was barely of reading age, but I still recall the faces of Maris and his more popular New York Yankees teammate, Mantle, on the cover of Life magazine. The two baseball players were engaged in a historic race to tie or break Babe Ruth’s beloved 1927 record of 60 home runs in one year. Those were idealistic times when my teacher would say things like「we need more heroes like Babe Ruth,」or「we never had a crooked president.」Because the legend of Babe Ruth was sacred, anyone who might challenge it had better be worthy. Mantle, a courageous perennial slugger who fought on despite bad knees, was the fans’ — and the press’s — overwhelming favorite. A good-looking, good-natured fellow, Mantle came across as the kind of all-American boy everyone hoped would set records. Maris, on the other hand, was a gruff, private fellow, an underdog who had never hit more than 39 home runs in a year, much less anywhere near 60. He was seen as a nasty sort, someone who didn’t give interviews and didn’t like kids. They all rooted for Mantle. I liked Maris.

As it turned out, Mantle’s knees got the best of him, and he made it to only 54 home runs. Maris broke Ruth’s record with 61. Over his career, Babe Ruth had hit 50 or more home runs in a season four times and twelve times had hit more than anyone else in the league. Maris never again hit 50 or even 40 and never again led the league. That overall performance fed the resentment. As the years went by, Maris was criticized relentlessly by fans, sportswriters, and sometimes other players. Their verdict: he had crumbled under the pressure of being a champion. Said one famous baseball old-timer,「Maris had no right to break Ruth’s record.」17 That may have been true, but not for the reason the old-timer thought.

Many years later, influenced by that college math course, I would learn to think about Maris’s achievement in a new light. To analyze the Ruth-Mantle race I reread that old Life article and found in it a brief discussion of probability theory18 and how it could be used to predict the result of the Maris-Mantle race. I decided to make my own mathematical model of home run hitting. Here’s how it goes: The result of any particular at bat (that is, an opportunity for success) depends primarily on the player’s ability, of course. But it also depends on the interplay of many other factors: his health; the wind, the sun, or the stadium lights; the quality of the pitches he receives; the game situation; whether he correctly guesses how the pitcher will throw; whether his hand-eye coordination works just perfectly as he takes his swing; whether that brunette he met at the bar kept him up too late or the chili-cheese dog with garlic fries he had for breakfast soured his stomach. If not for all the unpredictable factors, a player would either hit a home run on every at bat or fail to do so. Instead, for each at bat all you can say is that he has a certain probability of hitting a home run and a certain probability of failing to hit one. Over the hundreds of at bats he has each year, those random factors usually average out and result in some typical home run production that increases as the player becomes more skillful and then eventually decreases owing to the same process that etches wrinkles in his handsome face. But sometimes the random factors don’t average out. How often does that happen, and how large is the aberration?

From the player’s yearly statistics you can estimate his probability of hitting a home run at each opportunity — that is, on each trip to the plate.19 In 1960, the year before his record year, Roger Maris hit 1 home run for every 14.7 opportunities (about the same as his home run output averaged over his four prime years). Let’s call this performance normal Maris. You can model the home run hitting skill of normal Maris this way: Imagine a coin that comes up heads on average not 1 time every 2 tosses but 1 time every 14.7. Then flip that coin 1 time for every trip to the plate and award Maris 1 home run every time the coin comes up heads. If you want to match, say, Maris’s 1961 season, you flip the coin once for every home run opportunity he had that year. By that method you can generate a whole series of alternative 1961 seasons in which Maris’s skill level matches the home run totals of normal-Maris. The results of those mock seasons illustrate the range of accomplishment that normal Maris could have expected in 1961 if his talent had not spiked — that is, given only his「normal」home run ability plus the effects of pure luck.

To have actually performed this experiment, I’d have needed a rather odd coin, a rather strong wrist, and a leave of absence from college. In practice the mathematics of randomness allowed me to do the analysis employing equations and a computer. In most of my imaginary 1961 seasons, normal Maris’s home run output was, not surprisingly, in the range that was normal for Maris. Some mock seasons he hit a few more, some a few less. Only rarely did he hit a lot more or a lot less. How frequently did normal Maris’s talent produce Ruthian results?

I had expected normal Maris’s chances of matching Ruth’s record to be roughly equal to Jack Whittaker’s when he plopped down an extra dollar as he bought breakfast biscuits at a convenience store a few years back and ended up winning `$`314 million in his state Powerball lottery. That’s what a less talented player’s chances would have been. But normal Maris, though not Ruthian, was still far above average at hitting home runs. And so normal Maris’s probability of producing a record output by chance was not microscopic: he matched or broke Ruth’s record about 1 time every 32 seasons. That might not sound like good odds, and you probably wouldn’t have wanted to bet on either Maris or the year 1961 in particular. But those odds lead to a striking conclusion. To see why, let’s now ask a more interesting question. Let’s consider all players with the talent of normal Maris and the entire seventy-year period from Ruth’s record to the start of the「steroid era」(when, because of players’ drug use, home runs became far more common). What are the odds that some player at some time would have matched or broken Ruth’s record by chance alone? Is it reasonable to believe that Maris just happened to be the recipient of the lucky aberrant season?

History shows that in that period there was about 1 player every 3 years with both the talent and the opportunities comparable to those of normal Maris in 1961. When you add it all up, that makes the probability that by chance alone one of those players would have matched or broken Ruth’s record a little greater than 50 percent. In other words, over a period of seventy years a random spike of 60 or more home runs for a player whose production process merits more like 40 home runs is to be expected — a phenomenon something like that occasional loud crackle you hear amid the static in a bad telephone connection. It is also to be expected, of course, that we will deify, or vilify — and certainly endlessly analyze — whoever that「lucky」person turns out to be.

We can never know for certain whether Maris was a far better player in 1961 than in any of the other years he played professional baseball or whether he was merely the beneficiary of good fortune. But detailed analyses of baseball and other sports by scientists as eminent as the late Stephen Jay Gould and the Nobel laureate E. M. Purcell show that coin-tossing models like the one I’ve described match very closely the actual performance of both players and teams, including their hot and cold streaks.20

When we look at extraordinary accomplishments in sports — or elsewhere — we should keep in mind that extraordinary events can happen without extraordinary causes. Random events often look like nonrandom events, and in interpreting human affairs we must take care not to confuse the two. Though it has taken many centuries, scientists have learned to look beyond apparent order and recognize the hidden randomness in both nature and everyday life. In this chapter I’ve presented a few glimpses of those workings. In the following chapters I shall consider the central ideas of randomness within their historical context and describe their relevance with the aim of offering a new perspective on our everyday surroundings and hence a better understanding of the connection between this fundamental aspect of nature and our own experience.

### Notes

1 Kerstin Preuschoff, Peter Bossaerts, and Steven R. Quartz,「Neural Differentiation of Expected Reward and Risk in Human Subcortical Structures,」Neuron 51 (August 3, 2006): 381–90.

2 Benedetto De Martino et al.,「Frames, Biases, and Rational Decision-Making in the Human Brain,」Science 313 (August 4, 2006): 684–87.

3 George Wolford, Michael B. Miller, and Michael Gazzaniga,「The Left Hemisphere’s Role in Hypothesis Formation,」Journal of Neuroscience 20: RC64 (2000): 1–4.

4 Bertrand Russell, An Inquiry into Meaning and Truth (1950; repr., Oxford: Routledge, 1996), p. 15.

5 Matt Johnson and Tom Hundt,「Hog Industry Targets State for Good Reason,」Vernon County ( Wisconsin ) Broadcaster, July 17, 2007.

6 Kevin McKean,「Decisions, Decisions,」Discover, June 1985, pp. 22–31.

7 David Oshinsky,「No Thanks, Mr. Nabokov,」New York Times Book Review, September 9, 2007.

8 Press accounts of the number of rejections these manuscripts received vary slightly.

9 William Goldman, Adventures in the Screen Trade (New York: Warner Books, 1983), p. 41.

10 See Arthur De Vany, Hollywood Economics (Abington, U.K.: Routledge, 2004).

11 William Feller, An Introduction to Probability Theory and Its Applications, 2nd ed. (New York: John Wiley and Sons, 1957), p. 68. Note that for simplicity’s sake, when the opponents are tied, Feller defines the lead as belonging to the player who led at the preceding trial.

12 Leonard Mlodinow,「Meet Hollywood’s Latest Genius,」Los Angeles Times Magazine, July 2, 2006.

13 Dave McNary,「Par Goes for Grey Matter,」Variety, January 2, 2005.

14 Ronald Grover,「Paramount’s Cold Snap: The Heat Is On,」BusinessWeek, November 21, 2003.

15 Dave McNary,「Parting Gifts: Old Regime’s Pics Fuel Paramount Rebound,」Variety, August 16, 2005.

16 Anita M. Busch,「Canton Inks Prod’n Pact at Warner’s,」Variety, August 7, 1997.

17「The Making of a Hero,」Time, September 29, 1961, p. 72. The old-timer was Rogers Hornsby.

18「Mickey Mantle and Roger Maris: The Photographic Essay,」Life, August 18, 1961, p. 62.

19 For those who don’t know baseball, the plate is a rubber slab embedded in the ground, which a player stands before as he attempts to hit the ball. For those who do know baseball, please note that I included walks in my definition of opportunities. If the calculation is redone employing just official at bats, the result is about the same.

20 See Stephen Jay Gould,「The Streak of Streaks,」New York Review of Books, August 18, 1988, pp. 8–12 (we’ll come back to their work in more detail later). A compelling and mathematically detailed analysis of coin-toss models in sports appears in chapter 2 of a book in progress by Charles M. Grinstead, William P. Peterson, and J. Laurie Snell, tentatively titled Fat Chance; www.math.dartmouth.edu/-prob/prob/NEW/bestofchance.pdf.

0101透过随机性的目镜凝视

记得还是十来岁的时候，我曾经看着黄色的安息日烛火，在为它供应燃料的白色石蜡圆柱上随意地舞动着。我那时还太年轻，感受不到烛光的浪漫之处，但那烛火形成的摇曳影像，仍然使我体会到了烛光的不可思议。烛火飘忽不定，变幻无方，时而大时而小，但我看不到造成这些变化的明显的原因或安排。当时的我相信，那火焰后面一定有其节奏和成因，有一种科学家能用数学方程来预测和解释的模式。「生活可不是这样。」父亲却这么说，「有些无法预见的事情，有时照样会发生。」接着他说起他被关押、受饿的布痕瓦尔德纳粹集中营。有一次，他在面包铺里偷了一块面包。面包铺的面包师傅让盖世太保把所有嫌犯都集中起来，排成一排。「是谁偷了面包？」面包师傅问。要是没有人回答，他就会让卫兵把嫌犯们一个接一个地枪毙，直到人被杀光，或者有人出来认罪为止。父亲不想让其他人搭上一条性命，于是他站了出来。父亲并不想给自己加上些英雄主义的光环，他说他之所以这么做，不过是因为他知道不管怎样自己都会被枪毙。可是面包师傅并没有叫士兵打死我父亲，反而让他当了助手，而且待遇优厚。「纯属运气，」父亲说，「这跟你怎么做毫无关系。不过如果事情不是这样的话，你就永远都不会出生了。」我不由得深感震惊：我的存在竟然归功于希特勒！德国人杀害了我父亲的妻子和两个年幼的孩子，彻底抹去了他的前半辈子。要不是因为战争，我父亲就永远不会移民到纽约，永远不会遇到同样身为难民的我的母亲，当然也永远不会生下我和我的两个兄弟。

父亲很少谈及那场战争。当时我并未察觉，只是多年后才开始慢慢认识到一点，那就是当父亲谈起他痛苦的过去时，他并不是希望我只知道这些经历，他更想给我上一堂关于生命的大课。战争是种极端情况，但运气在生活中扮演的角色并非仅限于这种极端状况。如同那烛火一般，我们命运的主线总是会被各种各样的随机事件牵引到新的方向，这些随机事件 —— 以及我们对它们做出的反应 —— 决定了我们的命运。这个事实带来的结果，就是我们既难以预测，也难以解释人生。在注视相同的罗夏墨迹时，你可能会看到麦当娜，但在我的眼中，它却是只鸭嘴兽。同样，那些商务、法律、医药、体育和媒体领域中的数据，或者孩子的三年级成绩单，也都能以多种方式被解读。不过要解释偶然性在某个事件中扮演的角色，可不像解释罗夏墨迹那样无所谓对错：这些对偶然性的解释，有的是对的，有的则是错的。

在面对不确定的局面时，我们对局势的评估和做出的选择常常依赖于直觉。当碰到一只面带微笑的剑齿虎时，我们会如何判断它的微笑，是因为它心宽体胖，还是因为它在饿得半死的时候看到了我们 —— 它面前的一顿美餐？在这种情况下，我们的本能给出的处理方式无疑是更有进化优势的。但到了现代世界，不同物种之间的力量对比已经完全不同了，因此同样的本能到了今天就会有其缺点。用本能的惯性思维去对待今天的老虎，就可能导致并非最佳甚至是不妥当的决策。在大脑对不确定性的处理方式上，研究者认为这个结论毫无奇怪之处：许多研究已经表明，人类大脑对不确定局面进行评估的部分，和处理情感这一人类特性 —— 常常也被认为是非理性的主要来源 —— 的部分，两者存在着紧密的联系。

例如，功能性磁共振成像（fMRI）表明，风险和回报是由多巴胺能神经元系统的某些部分来估定的，而多巴胺能神经元系统正是对于动机和情感过程而言非常重要的大脑奖励回路。这些图像还显示，当我们在一个不确定的局面下进行决策时，扁桃体这个同样与人类情绪状态，特别是恐惧感有关的器官，也变得兴奋起来。

人们对涉及偶然性的局势进行分析的机制，是进化因素、大脑构造、个人经验、知识及情感共同形成的复杂产物。事实上，人类对于不确定性的反应是如此复杂，以至某些时候大脑的不同部分会得出不同结论，而最终做出的结论显然是这些部分相互斗争的结果。举个例子，如果每吃四次大虾之后，总有三次我们的脸肿得是正常人的五个大，那么「逻辑的」大脑左半球就会试图找出一个模式描述其中的规律，而「直觉的」大脑右半球则会简单地告诉你：「离虾远点儿！」不管怎么说，研究者通过不那么痛苦、被称为概率猜测的实验游戏得出的就是这个结论。实验提供给受试者的是两种不同颜色 —— 比如绿和红 —— 的卡片或灯光，它们取代了虾和组胺。在实验设置中，这些色彩以不同的概率出现，但除此之外别无其他模式。例如，在红 — 红 — 绿 — 红 — 绿 — 红 — 红 — 绿 — 绿 — 红 — 红 — 红这样的颜色序列中，红色出现的次数是绿色的两倍。受试者的任务是通过一段时间的观察，预测下一次出现的色彩是红还是绿。

在这个游戏中，我们可以有两种基本策略。策略一是以出现最为频繁的那个颜色为猜测结果。老鼠和其他非人类动物就喜欢用这种办法。该策略能够保证一个基本稳定的预测准确率，但同时也满足于这样的准确率而无法进一步提高。根据这种策略，比如绿色出现的比例为 75%，那么总是猜下一个出现的还是绿色，我们的预测准确率就会是 75%。而策略二是试图找到一种绿 / 红色出现的模式，并根据这一模式形成一个与之「匹配」的猜测。如果绿色和红色的出现确实遵循某种模式，而我们又找到这种模式，那么策略二就能以 100% 的准确率做出预测。但如果颜色的出现完全是随机的，那么最好还是坚持使用策略一。举例来说，如果实验中绿色以 75% 的比例随机出现，这时采用策略二，在 10 次中大概只能猜中 6 次。

一般来说，人类都试图揣测红 / 绿出现的模式，这样一来，我们在这个游戏中反而会被老鼠击败。而在实验中研究者更进一步，他们找来一些受试者，这些受试者实际上是遭受了被称为「裂脑」的外科手术术后大脑受损的病人，他们大脑的左右半球之间的通信被切断了。如果让这些病人进行上述实验，就可以分别对大脑的左右两个半球单独进行测试：如果让他们只使用左眼观察彩色灯光或卡片，同时只用左手做出预测，就相当于只对他们的大脑右半球进行实验；而如果是右眼和右手，实验就是针对大脑左半球进行的。在这样的实验中，研究者发现，对于同一个病人，其大脑右半球总是选择仅根据更频繁出现的颜色给出预测，而大脑左半球总是试图寻找颜色变化中的模式。

能够在不确定的情境中做出明智的评估和选择，这是一种罕有的能力。但与任何别的技能一样，我们可以通过经验的累积提高这一能力。在后面的章节中，我将更为深入地探讨偶然性在我们所处世界中扮演的角色；我还将介绍那些历经好几个世纪发展起来的、能够帮助我们理解这一角色的思想，以及常常将我们领入歧路的众多因素。英国哲学家和数学家罗素曾写道：

我们（对事物的认知）都始于「朴素的实在论」，即我们相信事物所是如所见。因此我们认为草是绿色的，石头是坚硬的，雪是冰冷的。但物理学使我们确信，草的绿、石头的硬和雪的冷，其实并非我们通过自身经验所知道的草的绿、石头的硬和雪的冷，而是某种非常不同的东西。

下面，我们可以透过随机性的目镜看到，生活中同样存在着许多事情，它们并非表面所见的那样，而是其他非常不同的东西。

2002 年，诺贝尔委员会将诺贝尔经济学奖授予科学家丹尼尔·卡尼曼。今天的经济学家可是什么问题都会研究的 —— 为什么教师工资那么低？足球队为什么那么值钱？猪的生理功能又是怎样限制了养猪场的规模（一头猪的排泄物是一个人的 3-5 倍，因此，拥有数千头猪的农场，常常能比它旁边的城市产生更多的废物）？ 尽管经济学家进行了这么多了不起的研究，2002 年诺贝尔经济学奖引人注目的一点，却是卡尼曼并非经济学家，他是一名心理学家。在数十年中，他与特沃斯基一道，研究和阐明了多种类型的关于随机性的错误理解，而恰恰是这些误解，造成了本书将要谈及的许多常见的谬误。

要理解随机性在生活中扮演的角色，我们面临的最大挑战在于，尽管随机性的基本原则脱胎于日常的逻辑，但它带来的许多后果是反直觉的。卡尼曼和特沃斯基的研究本身就是由一个随机事件引发的。20 世纪 60 年代中期，当时还是希伯来大学心理学初级教授的卡尼曼，接受了一桩相当无趣的杂差：为一群以色列空军飞行教官讲授有关行为矫正的经典理论及其在飞行训练心理学中的应用。卡尼曼强调指出，对正确的行为进行奖励能起到矫正作用，而惩罚错误行为却没有同样的效果。这时一名学员打断了他，并说出自己的看法。这个看法使卡尼曼恍然大悟，并在之后的几十年引导了他的研究。

「当我的飞行员做出漂亮的动作时，我总是毫不吝惜溢美之词，但他们的下一次飞行总是变得更加糟糕，」这名飞行教官说道，「当他们飞得很糟糕时，我就会对着他们一通大吼，而他们的下一次飞行一般总要更好一些。所以请别说奖励有效而惩罚无效，我的经验可并非如此。」其他教官都同意这一看法。在卡尼曼看来，飞行教官的经历听来不假，但他同样坚信由动物实验得出的奖励比惩罚更有效的结论。面对这个明显的悖论，他陷入沉思，接着一个念头冒了出来：在飞行员的飞行水平得到改善之前，教官确实是在大吼大叫，但在这个表象之后，我们不能说这些吼叫就是使得飞行员飞行水平得到改善的原因。

这是什么道理呢？答案要从一种被称为回归的现象中去寻找。所谓回归是指，在任何一系列随机事件中，跟在一个不寻常的事件之后的，更可能是一个相对而言更加普通的事件，而这种情况的发生完全出于偶然。飞行教官例子中的回归是这样的：每个学员都已经具备一定的驾驶战斗机的能力。飞行技术水平的提高跟很多因素有关，并且需要大量的练习。尽管他们的飞行技术通过训练得以慢慢提高，但这一提高是很难通过紧接着的两次飞行来察觉的。因此那些特别好或特别差的表现，基本都是运气造成的。如果飞行员进行了一次远好于正常水平的优异着陆，那么第二天他的表现更加正常的机会就很高 —— 换言之，第二天的表现要比今天更差一些。如果教官这次表扬了他，那么到了第二天，这个表扬似乎也没起到正面作用。而如果飞行员的这次着陆差得「不同凡响」，飞机直冲出跑道，一头栽进自助餐厅盛玉米杂烩的大桶里，那么他同样会以很高的概率在第二天飞得更接近正常水平 —— 也就是飞得更好。假设教官按惯例因为其糟糕的表现而大叫「你这头蠢猩猩！」，那么这个咒骂表面上看来就收到了好效果。这样一来，就出现了一种表面上的模式：学员飞得好，表扬就没有好效果；反而是让教官高分贝地用低等灵长类来相提并论的糟糕表现，却会在训斥之后表现出进步。卡尼曼课上的那些飞行教官，就从这样的经验中得出结论，即高声训斥是一种有力的教育工具。但实际上，这些大吼大叫根本就没有改变什么。

这个由直觉导致的错误，使得卡尼曼陷入思索。这样的误解是不是一种普遍现象呢？我们是不是也像这些教官一样，相信粗暴的批评能改善孩子的行为或雇员的表现？当面对不确定性时，我们还有没有别的误判？卡尼曼知道，出于必要，人类采用一些策略来降低判断的复杂性，而对概率的直觉反应在其中扮演了重要角色。你是否也曾有过这样的经历，在享用了从路边摊购买的看似甘甜可口的酸橘汁腌鱼炸玉米粉圆饼后觉得不舒服？在发生了这样的情况之后，你并不会有意识地回想自己到底在多少个这样的路边摊掏过腰包，并且数一数在这样大吃一顿之后，晚上猛灌碱式水杨酸铋的次数，并以此算出在这个摊子上中招的概率估计值。事实上，你的整个判断都是由直觉完成的。不过 20 世纪 50 年代与 60 年代早期的研究告诉我们，在这种情况下，人们对随机性的直觉常常会带来失败的结果。卡尼曼因此思忖道，我们对于不确定性的误解到底有多广泛呢？对于人类决策而言，这又意味着什么？几年后，卡尼曼邀请了一位同事特沃斯基，在研究小组的学术例会上进行了一次讲座。讲座结束后，卡尼曼在午餐时向特沃斯基说出了他正在酝酿的想法。之后的 30 年，特沃斯基和卡尼曼发现，即使是经验丰富的受试者，在面临随机性过程（不论是军事或体育比赛中的局势，生意上的窘境，还是医疗方面的疑问）时，人类的信念和直觉也常常有负所托，未能给出好的决策。

让我们设想一下，你写了一部关于爱情、战争和全球变暖的惊悚小说，但它已经被 4 个出版商退了稿。你的直觉，还有你那堵得发慌的胸口大概都在说，这些出版业专家的拒绝，一定意味着稿子确实一无是处。但是这种直觉是否正确？你的小说真的就卖不出去了吗？我们根据自己的经验，都知道在扔硬币时，哪怕接连好几次扔出来的都是正面朝上，也不意味着硬币的两面都是正面图案。对于一部出版物而言，要预测它的成功是不是也如此之难，以至即使它将来一定会登上畅销书榜单，也会有许多出版商看不到它的闪光点，还寄出那些写满了「谢谢（来稿）」和「不，（出版就算了）谢谢」的信？

20 世纪 50 年代，就有这么一本书，不但被多个出版商退稿，还得到了诸如「乏味透顶」、「典型的关于家庭内部那些鸡毛蒜皮的吵闹、微不足道的烦恼以及青春期情感的沉闷记录」，以及「哪怕这本书在 5 年前趁着主题（第二次世界大战）热度还在的时候问世，我也看不出它有任何应该出版的机会」之类的评语。但安妮·弗兰克的这本《安妮日记》至今已卖出 3000 万册，并成为有史以来最畅销的图书之一。这类退稿信还被寄给西尔维娅·普拉斯，因为她「肯定没有足够的真正的天分引起我们的注意」；乔治·奥威尔的《动物庄园》遭到退稿的原因则是「动物故事书在美国可没法卖出去」；而由于「又是波兰和犹太富人（的故事）」，艾萨克·巴什维斯·辛格也被退了稿。走红之前的托尼·席勒曼更是为代理商所抛弃，并得到「把所有那些美洲原住民的玩意儿都去掉」的建议。

这些都不是孤立的误判。实际上，许多日后大获成功的作品，都不得不在退稿中苦等着出头之日 —— 而且不是一次被退稿，是一次又一次被退稿。举例来说，与约翰·格里森姆、西奥多·盖泽尔（苏斯博士）和罗琳的作品相比，现在大概没有几本书会有那样明显而全方位的吸引力。但在成名之前，他们的手稿都遭到一次次的退稿。格里森姆的《杀戮时刻》被 26 个出版商退了稿，而他的第二部作品《糖衣陷阱》之所以能够引起出版商的兴趣，完全是因为它的私抄本已经在好莱坞广为流传，且得到 60 万美元的电影版权费。苏斯博士的第一部儿童读物《桑树街见闻》被 27 个出版商退稿。而罗琳的《哈利·波特》第一部的手稿也被退稿 9 次。与这些后来终于成功的人相对的，则是作家这个行当中人所共知的硬币的另一面：那许许多多潜力无穷却终未成功的作者 —— 那最初 20 次退稿后就封笔的格里森姆们，或在最初 5 次退稿后就放弃的罗琳们。其中的一位 —— 约翰·肯尼迪·图尔 —— 在经历了多次退稿之后，对自己作品的出版彻底绝望，并选择了自杀。他的母亲保留了他的手稿。11 年后，《笨蛋联盟》出版，并获得了普利策小说奖，售出近 200 万本。

一部伟大小说的创作（或者一件珠宝，又或者一块撒着巧克力碎的曲奇饼），和这部小说成书后在几千家书店里高高码起的书堆（或成套的珠宝或成袋的曲奇饼），这两者间有着一道随机性和不确定性的鸿沟。正是这道鸿沟，使我们看到各领域的成功人士几乎毫无例外都属于特定的一类人，那就是从不放弃的人。

发生在我们身上的许多事情 —— 职场、投资和生活中或大或小的决策的成功 —— 都是随机性的结果。这些随机因素的影响一点儿都不比我们本身的能力、勤奋和为机会所做的准备的影响来得小。因此，我们所认知的现实，并不是人或环境的直接反映，而是被不可预见或不断变化的外部力量随机扭曲后的模糊映像。这并不是说能力就无关紧要了 —— 能力正是增加我们成功机会的因素之一，但行动与结果之间的联系，可能并非我们所见的那般直接。因此，理解过去并不容易，但预测未来同样不容易。无论是理解过去还是预测未来，如果我们能超越肤浅的解释去观察，我们都将受益匪浅。

我们总是习惯性地低估随机性的影响。股票经纪人会推荐我们投资拉美共同基金，因为在过去 5 年的时间里，它的收益「吊打美国国内基金」；而我们血脂水平的升高则被医生归咎于我们的新习惯，而这个新习惯不过是在我们尽职尽责地给孩子们喂了一顿杧果加脱脂酸奶的早餐后，用一块搭配牛奶的家庭自制夹心蛋糕来犒劳一下自己罢了。股票经纪人或医生提出的建议，我们可能会接受，也可能不会，但是不管是否接受，都很少有人会去考虑这些建议是否有足够的数据支撑。在政治、经济和商业圈中，哪怕是在整个职业生涯或数百万美元被放在台面上让人做出孤注一掷的选择时，我们也常常把偶然事件明显错误地解释为成功或失败的原因。

好莱坞就是这方面的一个好例子。在好莱坞的金钱游戏中，赏（与罚）是否确有所值？还是说在票房的成功（与失败）中，运气扮演的角色实际上比人们一贯认为的要重要得多？我们都能理解天赋并不能保证带来成功，但另一方面，认为成功必然来自天赋的想法则颇有诱惑性。不过一直徘徊在好莱坞的一个令人不快的疑虑，就是一部影片能否大卖实际上没有人能够预知。小说家与剧作家威廉·高德曼 1983 年在其经典之作《银幕产业大冒险》中阐明了这个疑虑，之后它就一直在好莱坞徘徊着。高德曼在书中引用了前电影监制戴维·皮克尔的话：「如果我对所有我毙掉的片子说‘行’，而对我放行的片子说‘不行’，恐怕最后的票房结果也不会差多少。」

这并不是说一部家庭作坊小制作的神经兮兮的恐怖电影会与比如耗资 8000 万美元的《驱魔人前传》同样容易成为票房明星，虽然这种事情实际上在若干年前的确发生过：《女巫布莱尔》只花了制片人 6 万美元，却带来了 1.4 亿美元的美国国内票房收入，是《驱魔人前传》的 3 倍还多。不过高德曼所说的并不是这种情况，他仅考虑专业制作且影片质量足够好、得以由著名发行商来发行的好莱坞影片。高德曼并不否认电影的票房表现受多种因素的影响，不过他真正想说的，是这些影响因素是如此复杂，而一部电影从获准开拍到周末首映的路途，又是如此容易受到不可预见和不可控制的因素的干扰，因此，根据多个影响因素预测一部尚未杀青的电影的票房潜力，其实并不比靠扔硬币来猜测要好多少。

不可预测性的例子在好莱坞并不难找。影迷们应该还记得电影公司对百万美元大作《伊斯达》（沃伦·比蒂 + 达斯汀·霍夫曼 + 5500 万美元预算 = 1400 万美元票房收入）和《幻影英雄》（阿诺·施瓦辛格 + 8500 万美元 = 5000 万美元票房收入）所抱的期待。另一方面，我们大概也能回想起环球影城的主管们对年轻导演乔治·卢卡斯的《美国风情画》所持的悲观看法。该片的拍摄只花了不到 100 万美元，尽管遭受种种怀疑，它却带来了 1.15 亿美元的收入。不过这个成绩仍然未能阻止主管们对卢卡斯的下一个点子 —— 他自己称为《威尔斯的日记第一部：星际大战之星际杀手路克的探险》的故事 —— 怀有更为悲观的疑虑。按他们的话来说，这部片子根本就没法拍。最终，二十世纪福克斯电影公司拍摄了这部影片，但该公司对这部电影的预期也不过如此：公司付给卢卡斯区区 20 万美元作为编写剧本和导演的报酬；作为交换，卢卡斯获得了影片的续拍和销售权。预算 1300 万美元的《星球大战》最终带来了 4.61 亿美元的收入，而卢卡斯则得到一个帝国。

为一部电影开绿灯放行的决定，一般比影片制作完工要早几年，而在这些进行拍摄和营销的年头中，影片又会受到许多不知从哪里冒出来的不可预测的因素的影响，至于观众那难以揣摩的口味就更不必说了。考虑到这些事实，高德曼的理论就毫无牵强之处了（该理论同样得到经济界更近期研究的支持）。尽管如此，对电影公司行政主管们的评价，却并非基于其实际的管理能力，虽然这些能力对于美国钢铁公司或派拉蒙的头头们而言，同样至关重要。实际上，电影公司的行政主管所获得的评价，取决于他们能否选中票房热门。如果高德曼的观点是正确的，那么这种能力事实上便是一种错觉，而且无论这些主管如何大吹特吹，他们都配不上那 2500 万美元的合同。

最终的结果应该有多少归于能力，又有多少归于运气呢？这可不是个不动脑子就能得到答案的问题。随机事件常常像一盒麦片中的葡萄干那样抱团出现，并非总是一个个孤立的事件。尽管每个事物的潜能都是由幸运女神公平赐予的，但这些潜能体现在实际结果中可就算不得公平了。如果让 10 个好莱坞主管每人扔 10 次硬币，那么尽管他们有相等的机会成为赢家或输家，但最终总会有某些确定的赢家和输家。在这个扔硬币的例子中，至少有一个人能扔出 8 次或更多的正面或反面朝上的可能性为 2/3。

让我们假设卢卡斯又拍了一部新的《星球大战》，然后在测试市场上做个疯狂的试验。他用两个不同的名字 ——《星战前传 A》和《星战前传 B》—— 发行该片完全相同的两个拷贝，每部都有它自己的市场营销计划和发行安排，并且除了在预演公告和广告中，一个说的是《星战前传 A》而另一个说的是《星战前传 B》，这些计划和安排的细节都完全相同。如果我们让这「两」部影片相互竞争，哪一部会更受欢迎呢？比方让我们记录下最初的 2 万名电影爱好者所选择的影片（让我们忽略那些《星球大战》的死忠粉吧，这些人两部都会看，还会坚持认为两部影片有一些微妙但颇有意义的差别）。由于电影本身及营销策略完全相同，因此，我们可以把这个试验建成如下的数学模型：将这些观众排成一行，然后依次让他们扔硬币，扔出正面朝上就看《星战前传 A》，否则就看《星战前传 B》。由于这枚硬币正面或反面朝上的机会相等，你可能会认为，在这场试验性的票房战争中，每部电影都应该有大概一半的时间在比赛中领先。随机性的数学理论告诉我们的却是另外一回事：最可能出现的领先者发生改变的次数是 0 次，即在这场争夺 2 万名观众的比赛中，两部影片中的某一部会从头到尾始终保持领先，并且这个可能性是两部电影你追我赶、领先权不断换手的可能性的 88 倍。这个例子给我们的教训，并不是说所有影片都毫无差别，而是说哪怕所有的影片都分毫不差，也总会有某些影片比别的影片有更好的票房。

无论是好莱坞还是别的什么地方，待在公司会议室里的人们都不会在讨论中提及这些问题。因此，随机性的典型模式 —— 表面上的「热」或「冷」的曲线，或是抱团出现的数据 —— 都照例被错误地解释了。更糟糕的是，这些模式成为下一步行动的依据，好像它们真的反映了某种新趋势。

现代好莱坞历史上有不少聘用和解聘都非常高调的例子，雪莉·兰辛就是其中之一。兰辛掌管派拉蒙多年，取得了巨大的成功。在她任职期间，派拉蒙靠着《阿甘正传》《勇敢的心》《泰坦尼克》夺得了最佳影片奖，它们也带来了公司历史上收入最高的两年。但兰辛的名声在此后一落千丈，而在派拉蒙经历了如 Variety 杂志所说的「很长时间的票房不佳」之后，她最终被抛弃了。

数学可以对兰辛的命运给出一短一长两种解释。先来看看短的解释，请看看下面这串数字：11.4%、10.6%、11.3%、7.4%、7.1%、6.7%。发现了什么吗？没错，兰辛的老板萨姆纳·雷德斯通也发现了。对他而言，这个趋势已经足够明显，那就是派拉蒙的动作片组在兰辛在任的最后 6 年中所占的市场份额。这个趋势也让《商业周刊》怀疑兰辛「大概就是手不再‘热’了」。不久，兰辛宣布她将离任。几个月后，一个名叫布拉德·格雷的有天分的经理浮出水面。

一名无疑颇有天赋的人，怎么可能在带领公司走过 7 个很棒的年头后，一夜之间就失败了呢？有大量的理论可以解释兰辛早期的成功。当派拉蒙干得不错时，兰辛受到了称赞，因为她造就了好莱坞营运最佳的公司之一，而且还有着将老套的故事转化为 1 亿美元票房的点石成金术。当她的运气变糟后，修正主义者就占了上风。兰辛那重拍老片或续集的倾向，现在变成了一种缺点。各种评论中最为毒辣的，大概得算她的「半吊子品位」导致失败的说法。她因为同意拍摄《时间线》和《古墓丽影 2》这样的票房毒药而饱受指责。兰辛不愿冒险、观念过时、与潮流脱节之类的说法突然就成了主流。但是，预测一部取材于迈克尔·克莱顿畅销书的影片会有可观的票房，难道也有错？而当第一部《古墓丽影》带来 1.31 亿票房的时候，所有那些针对兰辛的批评又在哪里？

即使关于兰辛缺点的那些理论确有道理，她命运的转折也发生得太突然了！难道这个转折是因为她一夜之间变得反对冒险和脱离潮流了吗？不是，这个转折只是因为派拉蒙的市场份额突然下降了。头一年兰辛还高处云端，下一年她就成了午夜剧场喜剧演员用来制造连珠妙语的笑料。如果她跟好莱坞的其他人一样，因为自己不堪的离婚案而变得沮丧，或者因为挪用公款遭到起诉，或者加入了邪教组织之类，那么这种改变多少还能让人理解。但情况并非如此，兰辛显然也没有遭受什么大脑皮质损伤之类的问题。实际上，批评兰辛的评论者所能给出的证据，就只有这些失败本身。

事后来看，兰辛遭到解雇很显然是由于业界对于随机性的误解，而非她的那些有瑕疵的决策：当兰辛离开派拉蒙时，公司次年的影片已经开拍了。因此，如果我们想知道在一个兰辛仍然留任的平行宇宙中她大概做得怎样，只要看看她离职次年的数据就可以了。得益于《世界大战》和《最长的一码》等影片，派拉蒙收获了 10 年中最好的一个夏季票房，市场份额也回弹到近 10%。这不仅是一种讽刺，而且再次体现了随机性那回归均值的一面。Variety 的一篇头条对此的评价是：「分手的礼物：旧领导的影片为派拉蒙注入反弹动力。」但人们仍然会不由自主地认为，如果维亚康姆集团（派拉蒙的母公司）能再多一点点耐心，这个头条可能就会是「标志性的一年将派拉蒙和兰辛的职业生涯拉回正轨」。

兰辛在派拉蒙开始时好运当头，而结束时厄运缠身。不过，她的运气本还有可能更糟：她有可能从一开始就印堂发黑。这事儿就发生在哥伦比亚电影公司主管马克·坎顿身上。在刚被聘用时，他被人们认为是一个对票房了解透彻并充满激情的人，但最初几年令人失望的票房成绩使他遭到解雇。一位不愿透露姓名的同事评价他「没有能力分辨成功和失败的影片」，而另一位则称他「过分忙于呐喊助威」。当这个名誉扫地的人离开时，他在制片流水线上留下了《黑衣人》（5.89 亿美元的全球票房）、《空军一号》（3.15 亿美元）、《第五元素》（2.64 亿美元）、《甜心先生》（2.74 亿美元）和《狂蟒之灾》（1.37 亿美元）等影片。正如 Variety 所言，坎顿的遗产可谓「红得发紫」。

看吧，这就是好莱坞，它是一个迈克尔·奥维兹作为迪士尼总裁工作了 15 个月后，带着 1.4 亿美元解聘红包离开的小城；它也是一个哥伦比亚电影公司负责人戴维·伯格尔曼因伪造罪和挪用公司财产而被解雇，却在几年后被聘为米高梅首席执行官的地方。我们将在后面的章节看到，上述那些毒害了好莱坞的误判，同样扭曲着人们对生活各方面的认识。

我自己对于随机性那隐形影响的顿悟，都来自大学时代。当时我选修了一门概率论的课程，并把其中的数学原理用到体育比赛上。这事儿做起来不难，因为如同在电影业中一样，大多数体育运动的成绩很容易被量化，数据也是现成的。在这个过程中我发现，正如在体育比赛中学到的持之以恒、勤学苦练和团队合作能够被应用到生活各方面的拼搏中一样，从体育比赛中得到的关于随机性的教训也是如此。因此，我接下来要讲一讲棒球手罗杰·马里斯和米奇·曼托的故事。这个故事对所有人来说都有深刻的教育意义，就算你分不清棒球和乒乓球也不要紧。

那是在 1961 年，我刚刚到读书的年纪。但我还能记得《生活》杂志封面上的马里斯，以及他那更受欢迎的纽约洋基队队友曼托的样子。这两名棒球选手在当年展开了一场历史性的竞争，那就是追平或打破 1927 年由贝比·鲁斯创下的 60 个本垒打的纪录。那是一个唯心主义大行其道的时代，我的老师经常会讲一些诸如「我们需要更多像贝比·鲁斯那样的英雄」，或者「我们从来没有过不诚实的总统」之类的话。由于鲁斯的传奇已经被神化，所以任何可能对他形成挑战的人，最好都能配得上「鲁斯的挑战者」这个名头。勇敢、毫不懈怠并承受着膝伤坚持战斗的击球手曼托，是当年球迷和记者毋庸置疑的心头好。曼托长相讨人喜欢，脾气性格也好，他给人一种人人都希望由他来创造纪录的彻头彻尾的美国男孩形象。而另一方面，马里斯却是个粗暴又神秘兮兮的家伙，一个从未在一年中打出多于 39 个本垒打的失败者，而 39 个本垒打离 60 个本垒打还差着十万八千里。人们认为他十分讨厌，是那种从不接受采访也不喜欢孩子的人。在那场破纪录大战中，球迷和记者都坚决站在曼托一边 —— 不过我喜欢马里斯。

最终，即使受到膝伤困扰的曼托拼尽全力，也只是打出 54 个本垒打。马里斯凭借 61 个本垒打打破了鲁斯的纪录。在鲁斯的整个职业生涯中，他曾有 4 次在一个赛季中击出 50 个或更多的本垒打，并 12 次摘得联赛本垒打的桂冠。而在创造了新纪录之后，马里斯再也没能击出 50 个或哪怕 40 个本垒打，也没有在联赛中独占鳌头。这样的总体表现无疑是在给愤愤不平的公众情绪火上浇油。后来的日子里，马里斯不断遭到球迷、体育评论员以及其他球员的无情批评。他们的判决是：成为冠军的压力把他彻底压垮了。一位著名的棒球老前辈说道：「马里斯不配打破鲁斯的纪录。」这句话也许是真的，但原因并非这位老前辈想的那样。

多年以后，受到那门数学课的影响，我开始学着从另一个角度考虑马里斯的成就。为了分析这场「马里斯 - 曼托竞赛」，我重新阅读了《生活》的那篇旧文，并发现文中简短地讨论了概率论，以及如何用概率论预测竞赛结果。我决定自己建一个本垒打的数学模型，即任何一次击球（也就是通往胜利路上的一次机会），其结果当然主要取决于球员本身的能力，但它同样依赖于许多其他因素的相互作用：球员的健康状况、风、太阳或球场灯光、投球的质量、比赛形势、是否正确猜出了投手投球的方式、挥棒时手眼是否协调、是否因为在酒吧遇到了那位浅黑皮肤的姑娘而睡得太晚，或是有没有被早餐吃的辣奶酪热狗和蒜香薯条弄坏肚子，等等。如果没有这些不可预测的因素，球员要么每次都打出本垒打，要么每次都打不出。实际上，对于每次击球，我们只能说这名球员有一个确定的概率击出本垒打，也有一个确定的概率不能击出本垒打。球员每年获得的数百次击球机会，通常都被随机因素的影响通过平均消除了，最终得到的是某个典型的本垒打数量，它随着球员技术的提高而增加，并不可避免地因为那个在英俊面庞上刻出皱纹的过程的影响而下降。但有时这些随机因素并没有被完全平均。这种情况发生得有多频繁呢？它造成的偏差又有多大呢？

根据球员每年的统计数据，我们可以估算他在每次走到本垒 前准备击球时，能够打出本垒打的概率。1960 年，也就是马里斯破纪录那一年的前一年，他每 14.7 次击球能击出 1 记本垒打（与他表现最好的 4 年中的总平均值差不多）。让我们称这个水平为「正常马里斯」。我们用下面的方法来建立正常马里斯的本垒打模型：设想有一枚硬币，平均每抛出 14.7 次（而不是 2 次），就有 1 次正面朝上。当马里斯每次上垒击球时，扔一下这枚硬币，如果扔出正面朝上，就给他记上一次本垒打。如果用这种方式来让马里斯完成 1961 赛季的比赛，那么只要对该赛季中马里斯所获得的每个击球机会都扔一下这枚硬币，我们就能得到一大堆五花八门的「1961 赛季」。在这些「赛季」中，马里斯的技术水平都是「正常马里斯」的水平，而这些模拟赛季的结果，就能说明当技术没有突然提高时，「正常马里斯」在 1961 年能期望获得的成绩范围，就是他的「正常」本垒打能力，再加上纯粹运气的因素所能达到的成绩范围。

如果想要实实在在地完成这项实验，那么我不但要有一枚稀奇古怪的硬币，一个能撑得住那么多次扔硬币的强壮腕部，还得有一段时间能够暂时离开大学里的工作岗位。不过，利用随机性的数学理论，我只需要利用方程与计算机就可以完成这个分析。在许多虚拟的 1961 赛季中，正常马里斯的本垒打数量并不令人吃惊地落在了一个对他而言正常的范围内，在某些模拟赛季中他打中得多一点儿，在某些模拟赛季中打中得少一点儿，而在一个赛季中打中了比正常数量多得多或少得多的本垒打的情况则很罕见。那么，以马里斯的天赋获得鲁斯式的结果，这样的情况有多常见呢？

我原本以为马里斯追上鲁斯纪录的可能性，大概跟杰克·惠特克那次中彩票的机会差不多：惠特克几年前在便利店买早餐饼干时，花了 1 美元买了张全美「强力球」彩票，最终赢得了 3.14 亿美元。对于一个天分更差点儿的球员而言，追上鲁斯纪录的机会跟这差不多，马里斯尽管没有鲁斯的天赋，但其本垒打的水平仍然比平均水平高出许多。因此，仅靠运气就能创造新纪录的机会对马里斯而言，绝非可以忽略不计的概率：差不多每 32 个赛季，他就能有一个赛季追平或打破鲁斯的纪录。这个概率听起来似乎不是很高，估计也没有人会根据这个概率，在 1961 年这个特定的年份，在马里斯这个特定的人身上投注，来赌他会破纪录。但由这个概率还能得出更为惊人的结论。为什么这样说呢？现在让我们问一个更有趣的问题：假设所有的球员都具有正常马里斯的天分，让我们再来考察一下，从鲁斯创造纪录到「类固醇时代」（在那个时代，由于药物的使用，本垒打与以前相比变得很寻常）开始时的所有 72 年的时间。在这个时期内，仅靠运气，某个球员在某个时候追平或打破鲁斯的纪录，这种可能性有多大呢？相信马里斯仅仅只是凑巧成为那个特殊赛季的幸运儿的观点，是否真的合理呢？

分析表明，在这段时期内，大概每 3 年就有一名球员兼具与 1961 年的正常马里斯差不多的天赋和运气。总的来说，仅依靠运气，这些球员中的某一个能够追平或打破鲁斯纪录的可能性，要比 50% 多一点儿。换句话说，在 70 年的时间里，一名实力更接近 40 个本垒打的球员打出一个 60 个或更多本垒打的随机峰值，这种情况发生的可能性超过了 50%—— 这个随机峰值有点儿像我们在通过糟糕的线路通话时，在背景杂音中不时听到的很大的噼啪声。而同样可以期待的是，不管那个破纪录的「幸运儿」是谁，人们仍然会一如既往地神化或者贬低他，当然也会一如既往无穷无尽地分析他。

我们永远不能准确地知道，相较于其职业棒球生涯中的其他时间，1961 年的马里斯是一个水平好得多的球员，还是个仅仅受到幸运女神垂青的人。但古尔德或诺贝尔自然科学奖获得者珀塞尔等卓越的科学家对棒球和其他体育项目进行的细致分析表明，我描述的那个扔硬币模型与球员和球队的真实表现很吻合，包括他们的巅峰与低谷。

因此，当我们再看到体育或其他领域的辉煌成就时，我们应该记住，非凡的成就不一定有非凡的原因。随机事件常常看似并非随机，但在解释这个林林总总的世界时，我们千万不要混淆这两者。在耗费了许多世纪的努力之后，科学家终于学会如何透过表面的秩序，去发现隐藏在自然界和日常生活的面纱之下的随机性。在这一章，我们不过对随机性运作方式投以匆匆数瞥。在下面的章节中，我将结合随机性的历史发展考察随机性的核心思想，并说明这些思想与我们的目标的关联性。我们的目标，是希望为你提供一个观察我们周遭世界的新视角，让你能够更好地理解随机性这一自然界的基本特征与我们自身体验的联系。

## 0201. The Laws of Truths and Half-Truths

LOOKING TO THE SKY on a clear, moonless night, the human eye can detect thousands of twinkling sources of light. Nestled among those haphazardly scattered stars are patterns. A lion here, a dipper there. The ability to detect patterns can be both a strength and a weakness. Isaac Newton pondered the patterns of falling objects and created a law of universal gravitation. Others have noted a spike in their athletic performance when they are wearing dirty socks and thenceforth have refused to wear clean ones. Among all the patterns of nature, how do we distinguish the meaningful ones? Drawing that distinction is an inherently practical enterprise. And so it might not astonish you to learn that, unlike geometry, which arose as a set of axioms, proofs, and theorems created by a culture of ponderous philosophers, the theory of randomness sprang from minds focused on spells and gambling, figures we might sooner imagine with dice or a potion in hand than a book or a scroll.

The theory of randomness is fundamentally a codification of common sense. But it is also a field of subtlety, a field in which great experts have been famously wrong and expert gamblers infamously correct. What it takes to understand randomness and overcome our misconceptions is both experience and a lot of careful thinking. And so we begin our tour with some of the basic laws of probability and the challenges involved in uncovering, understanding, and applying them. One of the classic explorations of people's intuition about those laws was an experiment conducted by the pair who did so much to elucidate our misconceptions, Daniel Kahneman and Amos Tversky.1 Feel free to take part — and learn something about your own probabilistic intuition.

Imagine a woman named Linda, thirty-one years old, single, outspoken, and very bright. In college she majored in philosophy. While a student she was deeply concerned with discrimination and social justice and participated in antinuclear demonstrations. Tversky and Kahneman presented this description to a group of eighty-eight subjects and asked them to rank the following statements on a scale of 1 to 8 according to their probability, with 1 representing the most probable and 8 the least. Here are the results, in order from most to least probable:

| Statement | Average Probability Rank |
| --- | --- |
| Linda is active in the feminist movement. | 2.1 |
| Linda is a psychiatric social worker. | 3.1 |
| Linda works in a bookstore and takes yoga classes. | 3.3 |
| Linda is a bank teller and is active in the feminist movement. | 4.1 |
| Linda is a teacher in an elementary school. | 5.2 |
| Linda is a member of the League of Women Voters. | 5.4 |
| Linda is a bank teller. | 6.2 |
| Linda is an insurance salesperson. | 6.4 |

At first glance there may appear to be nothing unusual in these results: the description was in fact designed to be representative of an active feminist and unrepresentative of a bank teller or an insurance salesperson. But now let's focus on just three of the possibilities and their average ranks, listed below in order from most to least probable. This is the order in which 85 percent of the respondents ranked the three possibilities:

| Statement | Average Probability Rank |
| --- | --- |
| Linda is active in the feminist movement. | 2.1 |
| Linda is a bank teller and is active in the feminist movement. | 4.1 |
| Linda is a bank teller. | 6.2 |

If nothing about this looks strange, then Kahneman and Tversky have fooled you, for if the chance that Linda is a bank teller and is active in the feminist movement were greater than the chance that Linda is a bank teller, there would be a violation of our first law of probability, which is one of the most basic of all: The probability that two events will both occur can never be greater than the probability that each will occur individually. Why not? Simple arithmetic: the chances that event A will occur = the chances that events A and B will occur + the chance that event A will occur and event B will not occur.

Kahneman and Tversky were not surprised by the result because they had given their subjects a large number of possibilities, and the connections among the three scenarios could easily have gotten lost in the shuffle. And so they presented the description of Linda to another group, but this time they presented only these possibilities:

Linda is active in the feminist movement.

Linda is a bank teller and is active in the feminist movement.

Linda is a bank teller.

To their surprise, 87 percent of the subjects in this trial also ranked the probability that Linda is a bank teller and is active in the feminist movement higher than the probability that Linda is a bank teller. And so the researchers pushed further: they explicitly asked a group of thirty-six fairly sophisticated graduate students to consider their answers in light of our first law of probability. Even after the prompting, two of the subjects clung to the illogical response.

The interesting thing that Kahneman and Tversky noticed about this stubborn misperception is that people will not make the same mistake if you ask questions that are unrelated to what they know about Linda. For example, suppose Kahneman and Tversky had asked which of these statements seems most probable:

Linda owns an International House of Pancakes franchise.

Linda had a sex-change operation and is now known as Larry.

Linda had a sex-change operation, is now known as Larry, and owns an International House of Pancakes franchise.

In this case few people would choose the last option as more likely than either of the other two.

Kahneman and Tversky concluded that because the detail「Linda is active in the feminist movement」rang true based on the initial description of her character, when they added that detail to the bank-teller speculation, it increased the scenario's credibility. But a lot could have happened between Linda's hippie days and her fourth decade on the planet. She might have undergone a conversion to a fundamentalist religious cult, married a skinhead and had a swastika tattooed on her left buttock, or become too busy with other aspects of her life to remain politically active. In each of these cases and many others she would probably not be active in the feminist movement. So adding that detail lowered the chances that the scenario was accurate even though it appeared to raise the chances of its accuracy.

If the details we are given fit our mental picture of something, then the more details in a scenario, the more real it seems and hence the more probable we consider it to be — even though any act of adding less-than-certain details to a conjecture makes the conjecture less probable. This inconsistency between the logic of probability and people's assessments of uncertain events interested Kahneman and Tversky because it can lead to unfair or mistaken assessments in real-life situations. Which is more likely: that a defendant, after discovering the body, left the scene of the crime or that a defendant, after discovering the body, left the scene of the crime because he feared being accused of the grisly murder? Is it more probable that the president will increase federal aid to education or that he or she will increase federal aid to education with funding freed by cutting other aid to the states? Is it more likely that your company will increase sales next year or that it will increase sales next year because the overall economy has had a banner year? In each case, even though the latter is less probable than the former, it may sound more likely. Or as Kahneman and Tversky put it,「A good story is often less probable than a less satisfactory…[explanation].」

Kahneman and Tversky found that even highly trained doctors make this error.2 They presented a group of internists with a serious medical problem: a pulmonary embolism (a blood clot in the lung). If you have that ailment, you might display one or more of a set of symptoms. Some of those symptoms, such as partial paralysis, are uncommon; others, such as shortness of breath, are probable. Which is more likely: that the victim of an embolism will experience only partial paralysis or that the victim will experience both partial paralysis and shortness of breath? Kahneman and Tversky found that 91 percent of the doctors believed a clot was less likely to cause just a rare symptom than it was to cause a combination of the rare symptom and a common one. (In the doctors' defense, patients don't walk into their offices and say things like「I have a blood clot in my lungs. Guess my symptoms.」)

Years later one of Kahneman's students and another researcher found that attorneys fall prey to the same bias in their judgments.3 Whether involved in a criminal case or a civil case, clients typically depend on their lawyers to assess what may occur if their case goes to trial. What are the chances of acquittal or of a settlement or a monetary judgment in various amounts? Although attorneys might not phrase their opinions in terms of numerical probabilities, they offer advice based on their personal forecast of the relative likelihood of the possible outcomes. Here, too, the researchers found that lawyers assign higher probabilities to contingencies that are described in greater detail. For example, at the time of the civil lawsuit brought by Paula Jones against then president Bill Clinton, 200 practicing lawyers were asked to predict the probability that the trial would not run its full course. For some of the subjects that possibility was broken down into specific causes for the trial's early end, such as settlement, withdrawal of the charges, or dismissal by the judge. In comparing the two groups — lawyers who had simply been asked to predict whether the trial would run its full course and lawyers who had been presented with ways in which the trial might reach a premature conclusion — the researchers found that the lawyers who had been presented with causes of a premature conclusion were much more likely than the other lawyers to predict that the trial would reach an early end.

The ability to evaluate meaningful connections among different phenomena in our environment may be so important that it is worth seeing a few mirages. If a starving caveman sees an indistinct greenish blur on a distant rock, it is more costly to dismiss it as uninteresting when it is in reality a plump, tasty lizard than it is to race over and pounce on what turns out to be a few stray leaves. And so, that theory goes, we might have evolved to avoid the former mistake at the cost of sometimes making the latter.

IN THE STORY of mathematics the ancient Greeks stand out as the inventors of the manner in which modern mathematics is carried out: through axioms, proofs, theorems, more proofs, more theorems, and so on. In the 1930s, however, the Czech American mathematician Kurt Gödel — a friend of Einstein's — showed this approach to be somewhat deficient: most of mathematics, he demonstrated, must be inconsistent or else must contain truths that cannot be proved. Still, the march of mathematics has continued unabated in the Greek style, the style of Euclid. The Greeks, geniuses in geometry, created a small set of axioms, statements to be accepted without proof, and proceeded from there to prove many beautiful theorems detailing the properties of lines, planes, triangles, and other geometric forms. From this knowledge they discerned, for example, that the earth is a sphere and even calculated its radius. One must wonder why a civilization that could produce a theorem such as proposition 29 of book 1 of Euclid's Elements — 「a straight line falling on two parallel straight lines makes the alternate angles equal to one another, the exterior angle equal to the interior and opposite angle, and the interior angles on the same side equal to two right angles」 — did not create a theory showing that if you throw two dice, it would be unwise to bet your Corvette on their both coming up a 6.

Actually, not only didn't the Greeks have Corvettes, but they also didn't have dice. They did have gambling addictions, however. They also had plenty of animal carcasses, and so what they tossed were astragali, made from heel bones. An astragalus has six sides, but only four are stable enough to allow the bone to come to rest on them. Modern scholars note that because of the bone's construction, the chances of its landing on each of the four sides are not equal: they are about 10 percent for two of the sides and 40 percent for the other two. A common game involved tossing four astragali. The outcome considered best was a rare one, but not the rarest: the case in which all four astragali came up different. This was called a Venus throw. The Venus throw has a probability of about 384 out of 10,000, but the Greeks, lacking a theory of randomness, didn't know that.

The Greeks also employed astragali when making inquiries of their oracles. From their oracles, questioners could receive answers that were said to be the words of the gods. Many important choices made by prominent Greeks were based on the advice of oracles, as evidenced by the accounts of the historian Herodotus, and writers like Homer, Aeschylus, and Sophocles. But despite the importance of astragali tosses in both gambling and religion, the Greeks made no effort to understand the regularities of astragali throws.

Why didn't the Greeks develop a theory of probability? One answer is that many Greeks believed that the future unfolded according to the will of the gods. If the result of an astragalus toss meant「marry the stocky Spartan girl who pinned you in that wrestling match behind the school barracks,」a Greek boy wouldn't view the toss as the lucky (or unlucky) result of a random process; he would view it as the gods' will. Given such a view, an understanding of randomness would have been irrelevant. Thus a mathematical prediction of randomness would have seemed impossible. Another answer may lie in the very philosophy that made the Greeks such great mathematicians: they insisted on absolute truth, proved by logic and axioms, and frowned on uncertain pronouncements. In Plato's Phaedo, for example, Simmias tells Socrates that「arguments from probabilities are impostors」and anticipates the work of Kahneman and Tversky by pointing out that「unless great caution is observed in the use of them they are apt to be deceptive — in geometry, and in other things too.」4 And in Theaetetus, Socrates says that any mathematician「who argued from probabilities and likelihoods in geometry would not be worth an ace.」5 But even Greeks who believed that probabilists were worth an ace might have had difficulty working out a consistent theory in those days before extensive record keeping because people have notoriously poor memories when it comes to estimating the frequency — and hence the probability — of past occurrences.

Which is greater: the number of six-letter English words having n as their fifth letter or the number of six-letter English words ending in ing? Most people choose the group of words ending in ing.6 Why? Because words ending in ing are easier to think of than generic six-letter words having n as their fifth letter. But you don't have to survey the Oxford English Dictionary — or even know how to count — to prove that guess wrong: the group of six-letter words having n as their fifth letter words includes all six-letter words ending in ing. Psychologists call that type of mistake the availability bias because in reconstructing the past, we give unwarranted importance to memories that are most vivid and hence most available for retrieval.

The nasty thing about the availability bias is that it insidiously distorts our view of the world by distorting our perception of past events and our environment. For example, people tend to overestimate the fraction of homeless people who are mentally ill because when they encounter a homeless person who is not behaving oddly, they don't take notice and tell all their friends about that unremarkable homeless person they ran into. But when they encounter a homeless person stomping down the street and waving his arms at an imaginary companion while singing「When the Saints Go Marching In,」they do tend to remember the incident.7 How probable is it that of the five lines at the grocery-store checkout you will choose the one that takes the longest? Unless you've been cursed by a practitioner of the black arts, the answer is around 1 in 5. So why, when you look back, do you get the feeling you have a supernatural knack for choosing the longest line? Because you have more important things to focus on when things go right, but it makes an impression when the lady in front of you with a single item in her cart decides to argue about why her chicken is priced at $1.50 a pound when she is certain the sign at the meat counter said $1.49.

One stark illustration of the effect the availability bias can have on our judgment and decision making came from a mock jury trial.8 In the study the jury was given equal doses of exonerating and incriminating evidence regarding the charge that a driver was drunk when he ran into a garbage truck. The catch is that one group of jurors was given the exonerating evidence in a「pallid」version:「The owner of the garbage truck stated under cross-examination that his garbage truck was difficult to see at night because it was gray in color.」The other group was given a more「vivid」form of the same evidence:「The owner of the garbage truck stated under cross-examination that his garbage truck was difficult to see at night because it was gray in color. The owner remarked his trucks are gray ‘because it hides the dirt. What do you want, I should paint 'em pink?'」The incriminating evidence was also presented in two ways, this time in a vivid form to the first group and in a pallid version to the second. When the jurors were asked to produce guilt/innocence ratings, the side with the more vivid presentation of the evidence always prevailed, and the effect was enhanced when there was a forty-eight-hour delay before rendering the verdict (presumably because the recall gap was even greater).

By distorting our view of the past, the availability bias complicates any attempt to make sense of it. That was true for the ancient Greeks just as it is true for us. But there was one other major obstacle to an early theory of randomness, a very practical one: although basic probability requires only knowledge of arithmetic, the Greeks did not know arithmetic, at least not in a form that is easy to work with. In Athens in the fifth century B.C., for instance, at the height of Greek civilization, a person who wanted to write down a number used a kind of alphabetic code.9 The first nine of the twenty-four letters in the Greek alphabet stood for the numbers we call 1 through 9. The next nine letters stood for the numbers we call 10, 20, 30, and so on. And the last six letters plus three additional symbols stood for the first nine hundreds (100, 200, and so on, to 900). If you think you have trouble with arithmetic now, imagine trying to subtract from ! To make matters worse, the order in which the ones, tens, and hundreds were written didn't really matter: sometimes the hundreds were written first, sometimes last, and sometimes all order was ignored. Finally, the Greeks had no zero.

The concept of zero came to Greece when Alexander invaded the Babylonian Empire in 331 B.C. Even then, although the Alexandrians began to use the zero to denote the absence of a number, it wasn't employed as a number in its own right. In modern mathematics the number 0 has two key properties: in addition it is the number that, when added to any other number, leaves the other number unchanged, and in multiplication it is the number that, when multiplied by any other number, is itself unchanged. This concept wasn't introduced until the ninth century, by the Indian mathematician Mahāvīra.

Even after the development of a usable number system it would be many more centuries before people came to recognize addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division as the fundamental arithmetic operations — and slowly realized that convenient symbols would make their manipulation far easier. And so it wasn't until the sixteenth century that the Western world was truly poised to develop a theory of probability. Still, despite the handicap of an awkward system of calculation, it was the civilization that conquered the Greeks — the Romans — who made the first progress in understanding randomness.

THE ROMANS generally scorned mathematics, at least the mathematics of the Greeks. In the words of the Roman statesman Cicero, who lived from 106 to 43 B.C.,「The Greeks held the geometer in the highest honor; accordingly, nothing made more brilliant progress among them than mathematics. But we have established as the limit of this art its usefulness in measuring and counting.」10 Indeed, whereas one might imagine a Greek textbook focused on the proof of congruences among abstract triangles, a typical Roman text focused on such issues as how to determine the width of a river when the enemy is occupying the other bank.11 With such mathematical priorities, it is not surprising that while the Greeks produced mathematical luminaries like Archimedes, Diophantus, Euclid, Eudoxus, Pythagoras, and Thales; the Romans did not produce even one mathematician.12 In Roman culture it was comfort and war, not truth and beauty, that occupied center stage. And yet precisely because they focused on the practical, the Romans saw value in understanding probability. So while finding little value in abstract geometry, Cicero wrote that「probability is the very guide of life.」13

Cicero was perhaps the greatest ancient champion of probability. He employed it to argue against the common interpretation of gambling success as due to divine intervention, writing that the「man who plays often will at some time or other make a Venus cast: now and then indeed he will make it twice and even thrice in succession. Are we going to be so feeble-minded then as to affirm that such a thing happened by the personal intervention of Venus rather than by pure luck?」14 Cicero believed that an event could be anticipated and predicted even though its occurrence would be a result of blind chance. He even used a statistical argument to ridicule the belief in astrology. Annoyed that although outlawed in Rome, astrology was nevertheless alive and well, Cicero noted that at Cannae in 216 B.C., Hannibal, leading about 50,000 Carthaginian and allied troops, crushed the much larger Roman army, slaughtering more than 60,000 of its 80,000 soldiers.「Did all the Romans who fell at Cannae have the same horoscope?」Cicero asked.「Yet all had one and the same end.」15 Cicero might have been encouraged to know that a couple of thousand years later in the journal Nature a scientific study of the validity of astrological predictions agreed with his conclusion.16 The New York Post, on the other hand, advises today that as a Sagittarius, I must look at criticisms objectively and make whatever changes seem necessary.

In the end, Cicero's principal legacy in the field of randomness is the term he used, probabilis, which is the origin of the term we employ today. But it is one part of the Roman code of law, the Digest, compiled by Emperor Justinian in the sixth century, that is the first document in which probability appears as an everyday term of art.17 To appreciate the Roman applications of mathematical thinking to legal theory, one must understand the context: Roman law in the Dark Ages was based on the practice of the Germanic tribes. It wasn't pretty. Take, for example, the rules of testimony. The veracity of, say, a husband denying an affair with his wife's toga maker would be determined not by hubby's ability to withstand a grilling by prickly opposing counsel but by whether he'd stick to his story even after being pricked — by a red-hot iron. (Bring back that custom and you'll see a lot more divorce cases settled out of court.) And if the defendant says the chariot never tried to stop but the expert witness says the hoof prints show that the brakes were applied, Germanic doctrine offered a simple prescription:「Let one man be chosen from each group to fight it out with shields and spears. Whoever loses is a perjurer and must lose his right hand.」18

In replacing, or at least supplementing, the practice of trial by battle, the Romans sought in mathematical precision a cure for the deficiencies of their old, arbitrary system. Seen in this context, the Roman idea of justice employed advanced intellectual concepts. Recognizing that evidence and testimony often conflicted and that the best way to resolve such conflicts was to quantify the inevitable uncertainty, the Romans created the concept of half proof, which applied in cases in which there was no compelling reason to believe or disbelieve evidence or testimony. In some cases the Roman doctrine of evidence included even finer degrees of proof, as in the church decree that「a bishop should not be condemned except with seventy-two witnesses…a cardinal priest should not be condemned except with forty-four witnesses, a cardinal deacon of the city of Rome without thirty-six witnesses, a subdeacon, acolyte, exorcist, lector, or doorkeeper except with seven witnesses.」19 To be convicted under those rules, you'd have to have not only committed the crime but also sold tickets. Still, the recognition that the probability of truth in testimony can vary and that rules for combining such probabilities are necessary was a start. And so it was in the unlikely venue of ancient Rome that a systematic set of rules based on probability first arose.

Unfortunately it is hard to achieve quantitative dexterity when you're juggling VIIIs and XIVs. In the end, though Roman law had a certain legal rationality and coherence, it fell short of mathematical validity. In Roman law, for example, two half proofs constituted a complete proof. That might sound reasonable to a mind unaccustomed to quantitative thought, but with today's familiarity with fractions it invites the question, if two half proofs equal a complete certainty, what do three half proofs make? According to the correct manner of compounding probabilities, not only do two half proofs yield less than a whole certainty, but no finite number of partial proofs will ever add up to a certainty because to compound probabilities, you don't add them; you multiply.

That brings us to our next law, the rule for compounding probabilities: If two possible events, A and B, are independent, then the probability that both A and B will occur is equal to the product of their individual probabilities. Suppose a married person has on average roughly a 1 in 50 chance of getting divorced each year. On the other hand, a police officer has about a 1 in 5,000 chance each year of being killed on the job. What are the chances that a married police officer will be divorced and killed in the same year? According to the above principle, if those events were independent, the chances would be roughly 1/50 × 1/5,000, which equals 1/250,000. Of course the events are not independent; they are linked: once you die, darn it, you can no longer get divorced. And so the chance of that much bad luck is actually a little less than 1 in 250,000.

Why multiply rather than add? Suppose you make a pack of trading cards out of the pictures of those 100 guys you've met so far through your Internet dating service, those men who in their Web site photos often look like Tom Cruise but in person more often resemble Danny DeVito. Suppose also that on the back of each card you list certain data about the men, such as honest (yes or no) and attractive (yes or no). Finally, suppose that 1 in 10 of the prospective soul mates rates a yes in each case. How many in your pack of 100 will pass the test on both counts? Let's take honest as the first trait (we could equally well have taken attractive). Since 1 in 10 cards lists a yes under honest, 10 of the 100 cards will qualify. Of those 10, how many are attractive? Again, 1 in 10, so now you are left with 1 card. The first 1 in 10 cuts the possibilities down by 1/10, and so does the next 1 in 10, making the result 1 in 100. That's why you multiply. And if you have more requirements than just honest and attractive, you have to keep multiplying, so…well, good luck.

Before we move on, it is worth paying attention to an important detail: the clause that reads if two possible events, A and B, are independent. Suppose an airline has 1 seat left on a flight and 2 passengers have yet to show up. Suppose that from experience the airline knows there is a 2 in 3 chance a passenger who books a seat will arrive to claim it. Employing the multiplication rule, the gate attendant can conclude there is a 2/3 × 2/3 or about a 44 percent chance she will have to deal with an unhappy customer. The chance that neither customer will show and the plane will have to fly with an empty seat, on the other hand, is 1/3 × 1/3, or only about 11 percent. But that assumes the passengers are independent. If, say, they are traveling together, then the above analysis is wrong. The chances that both will show up are 2 in 3, the same as the chances that one will show up. It is important to remember that you get the compound probability from the simple ones by multiplying only if the events are in no way contingent on each other.

The rule we just applied could be applied to the Roman rule of half proofs: the chances of two independent half proofs' being wrong are 1 in 4, so two half proofs constitute three-fourths of a proof, not a whole proof. The Romans added where they should have multiplied.

There are situations in which probabilities should be added, and that is our next law. It arises when we want to know the chances of either one event or another occurring, as opposed to the earlier situation, in which we wanted to know the chance of one event and another event both happening. The law is this: If an event can have a number of different and distinct possible outcomes, A, B, C, and so on, then the probability that either A or B will occur is equal to the sum of the individual probabilities of A and B, and the sum of the probabilities of all the possible outcomes (A, B, C, and so on) is 1 (that is, 100 percent). When you want to know the chances that two independent events, A and B, will both occur, you multiply; if you want to know the chances that either of two mutually exclusive events, A or B, will occur, you add. Back to our airline: when should the gate attendant add the probabilities instead of multiplying them? Suppose she wants to know the chances that either both passengers or neither passenger will show up. In this case she should add the individual probabilities, which according to what we calculated above, would come to 55 percent.

These three laws, simple as they are, form much of the basis of probability theory. Properly applied, they can give us much insight into the workings of nature and the everyday world. We employ them in our everyday decision making all the time. But like the Roman lawmakers, we don't always use them correctly.

IT IS EASY TO LOOK BACK, shake our heads, and write books with titles like The Rotten Romans (Scholastic, 1994). But lest we become unjustifiably self-congratulatory, I shall end this chapter with a look at some ways in which the basic laws I've discussed may be applied to our own legal system. As it turns out, that's enough to sober up anyone drunk on feelings of cultural superiority.

The good news is that we don't have half proofs today. But we do have a kind of 999,000/1,000,000 proof. For instance, it is not uncommon for experts in DNA analysis to testify at a criminal trial that a DNA sample taken from a crime scene matches that taken from a suspect. How certain are such matches? When DNA evidence was first introduced, a number of experts testified that false positives are impossible in DNA testing. Today DNA experts regularly testify that the odds of a random person's matching the crime sample are less than 1 in 1 million or 1 in 1 billion. With those odds one could hardly blame a juror for thinking, throw away the key. But there is another statistic that is often not presented to the jury, one having to do with the fact that labs make errors, for instance, in collecting or handling a sample, by accidentally mixing or swapping samples, or by misinterpreting or incorrectly reporting results. Each of these errors is rare but not nearly as rare as a random match. The Philadelphia City Crime Laboratory, for instance, admitted that it had swapped the reference sample of the defendant and the victim in a rape case, and a testing firm called Cellmark Diagnostics admitted a similar error.20 Unfortunately, the power of statistics relating to DNA presented in court is such that in Oklahoma a court sentenced a man named Timothy Durham to more than 3,100 years in prison even though eleven witnesses had placed him in another state at the time of the crime. It turned out that in the initial analysis the lab had failed to completely separate the DNA of the rapist and that of the victim in the fluid they tested, and the combination of the victim's and the rapist's DNA produced a positive result when compared with Durham's. A later retest turned up the error, and Durham was released after spending nearly four years in prison.21

Estimates of the error rate due to human causes vary, but many experts put it at around 1 percent. However, since the error rate of many labs has never been measured, courts often do not allow testimony on this overall statistic. Even if courts did allow testimony regarding false positives, how would jurors assess it? Most jurors assume that given the two types of error — the 1 in 1 billion accidental match and the 1 in 100 lab-error match — the overall error rate must be somewhere in between, say 1 in 500 million, which is still for most jurors beyond a reasonable doubt. But employing the laws of probability, we find a much different answer.

The way to think of it is this: Since both errors are very unlikely, we can ignore the possibility that there is both an accidental match and a lab error. Therefore, we seek the probability that one error or the other occurred. That is given by our sum rule: it is the probability of a lab error (1 in 100) + the probability of an accidental match (1 in 1 billion). Since the latter is 10 million times smaller than the former, to a very good approximation the chance of both errors is the same as the chance of the more probable error — that is, the chances are 1 in 100. Given both possible causes, therefore, we should ignore the fancy expert testimony about the odds of accidental matches and focus instead on the much higher laboratory error rate — the very data courts often do not allow attorneys to present! And so the oft-repeated claims of DNA infallibility are exaggerated.

This is not an isolated issue. The use of mathematics in the modern legal system suffers from problems no less serious than those that arose in Rome so many centuries ago. One of the most famous cases illustrating the use and misuse of probability in law is People v. Collins, heard in 1968 by the California Supreme Court.22 Here are the facts of the case as presented in the court decision:

On June 18, 1964, about 11:30 a.m. Mrs. Juanita Brooks, who had been shopping, was walking home along an alley in the San Pedro area of the city of Los Angeles. She was pulling behind her a wicker basket carryall containing groceries and had her purse on top of the packages. She was using a cane. As she stooped down to pick up an empty carton, she was suddenly pushed to the ground by a person whom she neither saw nor heard approach. She was stunned by the fall and felt some pain. She managed to look up and saw a young woman running from the scene. According to Mrs. Brooks the latter appeared to weigh about 145 pounds, was wearing「something dark,」and had hair「between a dark blond and a light blond,」but lighter than the color of defendant Janet Collins' hair as it appeared at the trial. Immediately after the incident, Mrs. Brooks discovered that her purse, containing between $35 and $40, was missing.

About the same time as the robbery, John Bass, who lived on the street at the end of the alley, was in front of his house watering his lawn. His attention was attracted by「a lot of crying and screaming」coming from the alley. As he looked in that direction, he saw a woman run out of the alley and enter a yellow automobile parked across the street from him. He was unable to give the make of the car. The car started off immediately and pulled wide around another parked vehicle so that in the narrow street it passed within six feet of Bass. The latter then saw that it was being driven by a male Negro, wearing a mustache and beard…. Other witnesses variously described the car as yellow, as yellow with an off-white top, and yellow with an egg-shell white top. The car was also described as being medium to large in size.

A few days after the incident a Los Angeles police officer spotted a yellow Lincoln with an off-white top in front of the defendants' home and spoke with them, explaining that he was investigating a robbery. He noted that the suspects fit the description of the man and woman who had committed the crime, except that the man did not have a beard, though he admitted that he sometimes wore one. Later that day the Los Angeles police arrested the two suspects, Malcolm Ricardo Collins, and his wife, Janet.

The evidence against the couple was scant, and the case rested heavily on the identification by the victim and the witness, John Bass. Unfortunately for the prosecution, neither proved to be a star on the witness stand. The victim could not identify Janet as the perpetrator and hadn't seen the driver at all. John Bass had not seen the perpetrator and said at the police lineup that he could not positively identify Malcolm Collins as the driver. And so, it seemed, the case was falling apart.

Enter the star witness, described in the California Supreme Court opinion only as「an instructor of mathematics at a state college.」This witness testified that the fact that the defendants were「a Caucasian woman with a blond ponytail…[and] a Negro with a beard and mustache」who drove a partly yellow automobile was enough to convict the couple. To illustrate its point, the prosecution presented this table, quoted here verbatim from the supreme court decision:

| Characteristic | Individual Probability |
| --- | --- |
| Partly yellow automobile | 1/10 |
| Man with mustache | 1/4 |
| Negro man with beard | 1/10 |
| Girl with ponytail | 1/10 |
| Girl with blond hair | 1/3 |
| Interracial couple in car | 1/1,000 |

The math instructor called by the prosecution said that the product rule applies to this data. By multiplying all the probabilities, one concludes that the chances of a couple fitting all these distinctive characteristics are 1 in 12 million. Accordingly, he said, one could infer that the chances that the couple was innocent were 1 in 12 million. The prosecutor then pointed out that these individual probabilities were estimates and invited the jurors to supply their own guesses and then do the math. He himself, he said, believed they were conservative estimates, and the probability he came up with employing the factors he assigned was more like 1 in 1 billion. The jury bought it and convicted the couple.

What is wrong with this picture? For one thing, as we've seen, in order to find a compound probability by multiplying the component probabilities, the categories have to be independent, and in this case they clearly aren't. For example, the table quotes the chance of observing a「Negro man with beard」as 1 in 10 and a「man with mustache」as 1 in 4. But most men with a beard also have a mustache, so if you observe a「Negro man with beard,」the chances are no longer 1 in 4 that the man you observe has a mustache — they are much higher. That issue can be remedied if you eliminate the category「Negro man with beard.」Then the product of the probabilities falls to about 1 in 1 million.

There is another error in the analysis: the relevant probability is not the one stated above — the probability that a couple selected at random will match the suspects' description. Rather, the relevant probability is the chance that a couple matching all these characteristics is the guilty couple. The former might be 1 in 1 million. But as for the latter, the population of the area adjoining the one where the crime was committed was several million, so you might reasonably expect there to be 2 or 3 couples in the area who matched the description. In that case the probability that a couple who matched the description was guilty, based on this evidence alone (which is pretty much all the prosecution had), is only 1 in 2 or 3. Hardly beyond a reasonable doubt. For these reasons the supreme court overturned Collins's conviction.

The use of probability and statistics in modern courtrooms is still a controversial subject. In the Collins case the California Supreme Court derided what it called「trial by mathematics,」but it left the door open to more「proper applications of mathematical techniques.」In the ensuing years, courts rarely considered mathematical arguments, but even when attorneys and judges don't quote explicit probabilities or mathematical theorems, they do often employ this sort of reasoning, as do jurors when they weigh the evidence. Moreover, statistical arguments are becoming increasingly important because of the necessity of assessing DNA evidence. Unfortunately, with this increased importance has not come increased understanding on the part of attorneys, judges, or juries. As explained by Thomas Lyon, who teaches probability and the law at the University of Southern California,「Few students take a probability in law course, and few attorneys feel it has a place.」23 In law as in other realms, the understanding of randomness can reveal hidden layers of truth, but only to those who possess the tools to uncover them. In the next chapter we shall consider the story of the first man to study those tools systematically.

### Notes

1 Daniel Kahneman, Paul Slovic, and Amos Tversky, eds., Judgment under Uncertainty: Heuristics and Biases (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1982), pp. 90–98.

2 Amos Tversky and Daniel Kahneman,「Extensional versus Intuitive Reasoning: The Conjunction Fallacy in Probability Judgment,」Psychological Review 90, no. 4 (October 1983): 293–315.

3 Craig R. Fox and Richard Birke,「Forecasting Trial Outcomes: Lawyers Assign Higher Probabilities to Possibilities That Are Described in Greater Detail,」Law and Human Behavior 26, no. 2 (April 2002): 159–73.

4 Plato, The Dialogues of Plato, trans. Benjamin Jowett (Boston: Colonial Press, 1899), p. 116.

5 Plato, Theaetetus (Whitefish, Mont.: Kessinger, 2004), p. 25.

6 Amos Tversky and Daniel Kahneman,「Availability: A Heuristic for Judging Frequency and Probability,」Cognitive Psychology 5 (1973): 207–32.

7 Reid Hastie and Robyn M. Dawes, Rational Choice in an Uncertain World: The Psychology and Judgement of Decision Making (Thousand Oaks, Calif.: Sage, 2001), p. 87.

8 Robert M. Reyes, William C. Thompson, and Gordon H. Bower,「Judgmental Biases Resulting from Differing Availabilities of Arguments,」Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 39, no. 1 (1980): 2–12.

9 Robert Kaplan, The Nothing That Is: A Natural History of Zero (London: Oxford University Press, 1999), pp. 15–17.

10 Cicero, quoted in Morris Kline, Mathematical Thought from Ancient to Modern Times (London: Oxford University Press, 1972), 1:179.

11 Morris Kline, Mathematics in Western Culture (London: Oxford University Press, 1953), p. 86.

12 Kline, Mathematical Thought, pp. 178–79.

13 Cicero, quoted in Warren Weaver, Lady Luck (Mineola, N.Y.: Dover Publications, 1982), p. 53.

14 Cicero, quoted in F. N. David, Gods, Games and Gambling: A History of Probability and Statistical Ideas (Mineola, N.Y.: Dover Publications, 1998), pp. 24–26.

15 Cicero, quoted in Bart K. Holland, What Are the Chances? Voodoo Deaths, Office Gossip, and Other Adventures in Probability (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2002), p. 24.

16 Ibid., p. 25.

17 James Franklin, The Science of Conjecture: Evidence and Probability before Pascal (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2001), pp. 4, 8.

18 Quoted ibid., p. 13.

19 Quoted ibid., p. 14.

20 William C. Thompson, Franco Taroni, and Colin G. G. Aitken,「How the Probability of a False Positive Affects the Value of DNA Evidence,」Journal of Forensic Sciences 48, no. 1 (January 2003): 1–8.

21 Ibid., p. 2. The story is recounted in Bill Braun,「Lawyers Seek to Overturn Rape Conviction,」Tulsa World, November 22, 1996. See also www.innocenceproject.org. (Durham was released in 1997.)

22 People v. Collins, 68 Calif. 2d 319, 438 P.2d 33, 66 Cal. Rptr. 497 (1968).

23 Thomas Lyon, private communication.

0201真理与半真理的法则

仰望晴朗无月的夜空，人的肉眼能看到数以千计闪烁的光点。随意散布于天空的星星，存在着许多模式：这里有一头狮子，那里是一个水斗。发现模式的能力既能够成为一种力量，也能够变成一种弱点。牛顿在思索物体下落的模式中创造了万有引力定律；另一些人则发现，当他们穿着某双脏袜子时，运动成绩会明显提高，于是不再穿干净的袜子。在自然界的所有模式中，我们怎样才能分辨哪些具有真正的意义？就本质而言，这个分辨能力的培养需要通过实践来完成，因此如下事实也许不会让你感到太过吃惊：相较于几何这个诞生于一帮榆木脑袋的哲学家创造的整套公理、证明和定理的学科，随机性的理论萌发自那些专注于咒语和赌博的脑袋。在随机性理论发展的历史场景中，我们更容易联想到的是骰子或魔法药水，而不是书本或卷轴。

究其根本，随机性理论不过是一种成为文化的常识。但它同时也充满了种种微妙之处，在它的领域中，伟大的专家犯下了流传后世的错误，职业赌徒得到了正确的结论，尽管这些结论不得不就此与他们那狼藉的声名相伴。要理解随机性并克服我们的错误概念，需要的是经验和大量细致的思考。因此，作为本书阅读旅途的起点，我们将介绍概率论的若干基本法则，以及发现、理解和应用这些法则时面临的挑战。在上一章中，我们已经认识了卡尼曼和特沃斯基这两位专家，他们在阐明人们的错误概念方面做了大量的工作，而其中的一个实验，现在已经成为有关概率法则直觉理解方面的经典工作。请各位读者都加入这个实验，并以此了解你自己的一些概率直觉吧。

设想有一位名叫琳达的女性，31 岁，单身，坦率敢言，非常聪明。她大学时主修哲学，其间非常关心歧视与社会公平方面的问题，并参加了反核武器游行。在对 88 名受试者进行了这样一番描述后，特沃斯基和卡尼曼让受试者根据自己认定的可能性，以 1 分（最可能）到 8 分（最不可能）给下列陈述评分。根据最可能到最不可能的顺序，排序后的结果如下：

乍看之下，结果似乎没什么不寻常的地方：对琳达的描述本就是根据一名典型的女权主义者而非一名银行出纳或保险推销员设计的。但现在让我们注意其中的三种可能性和相应的得分，并按最可能到最不可能的顺序排列如下。这也是 85% 的实验结果给出的顺序：

如果你觉得这些结果似乎没什么奇怪的，那么卡尼曼和特沃斯基成功地把你给愚弄了：因为琳达是一名银行出纳并在女权运动中表现活跃的可能性，比琳达是一名银行出纳的可能性还要大，而这违背了有关概率的第一条 —— 也是最基础的一条 —— 定律：两个事件同时发生的概率，永远不会比各事件单独发生的概率大。为什么呢？这只不过是最简单的算术：事件 A 发生的概率 = 事件 A 和事件 B 都发生的概率 + 事件 A 发生而事件 B 不发生的概率。

卡尼曼和特沃斯基对此结果并不感到惊讶，因为受试者面对的是很多可能的情况，当这些可能的情况被打散后，上面三个陈述之间的联系很容易被人遗忘。因此，卡尼曼和特沃斯基向另一组受试者描述了琳达的情况，但只使用下面三个陈述进行打分：

琳达在女权运动中表现活跃。

琳达是一名银行出纳，并且在女权运动中表现活跃。

琳达是一名银行出纳。

令他们惊讶的是，87% 的受试者仍然认为琳达是一名银行出纳且在女权运动中表现活跃的可能性，比琳达是一名银行出纳的可能性要大。因此，两位研究者更进一步：他们明确要求 36 名还算有经验的研究生，在了解了概率第一定律之后，再来考虑他们的回答。可即使提示到这个程度，也有两名受试者执着于那个不合逻辑的答案。

在这个顽固的错误中，卡尼曼和特沃斯基注意到一件有趣的事情：如果问题与受试者所了解的琳达的情况没什么关系，同样的错误就不会发生。例如，假设卡尼曼和特沃斯基问的是下列陈述中哪一个最可能：

琳达拥有 IHOP（美国一家连锁餐厅）的特许经营权。

琳达做了变性手术，现在名叫拉里。

琳达做了变性手术，现在名叫拉里，并且拥有 IHOP 的特许经营权。

这时几乎没人认为最后一个陈述比其余两个更可能。

卡尼曼和特沃斯基由此得出结论，由于刚开始给琳达的特征描述使「琳达在女权运动中表现活跃」这一细节听起来很合理，因此当这一细节与银行出纳的猜想加在一起时，整个陈述的可信度就更高了。但在琳达的顽童岁月和她生活于我们星球上的第 40 个年头之间，许多事情可能会发生。她可能会皈依某个激进主义的宗教派别，可能与某个剃着平头的男人结了婚，并在左边屁股上文了一个纳粹万字符，或者因为忙于生活中的其他事情而不再积极参与政治活动。这些情况 —— 以及许多其他情况 —— 中的每一个都可能使她不再是女权运动的活跃分子。因此，额外加入的细节实际上减少了整个陈述发生的可能性，哪怕这个细节看来使得整个描述更显精确。

假设一件事的细节与人们对这件事预设的场景相吻合，那么这样的细节越多看起来越真实，人们越觉得它可能会发生 —— 尽管任何不确定细节的加入，都会使总的描述变得更不可能。概率的逻辑与人们评价不确定性事件之间的这个矛盾，令卡尼曼和特沃斯基很感兴趣，因为在现实中，这可能会带来不公平或错误的评判。「一名被告在发现尸体后离开罪案现场」，或者「一名被告在发现尸体后离开罪案现场，他担心自己因这起令人毛骨悚然的谋杀案而被起诉」，这两个陈诉中哪一个更有可能？「总统将加大对教育的资助力度」，或者「总统将取消其他资助，用省下来的资金加大对教育的资助力度」，前者是不是比后者更有可能？「公司明年的销售额将会增长」，或者「由于今年是公司的丰收年，因此明年的销售额将增长」，前者是不是比后者更有可能？所有这些陈述中，尽管后者的发生概率总是小于前者，但它们听起来都好像更有可能发生。或者如卡尼曼和特沃斯基所说：「一个好的故事常常比一个不那么令人满意的（解释）更不可能。」

卡尼曼和特沃斯基还发现，即使是受过严格训练的医生，也会犯同样的错误。他们俩给一群实习医生描述一个严重的病症：肺部血栓（在肺部的血液凝块）。人如果得了这个小毛病，就可能出现一系列症状中的一个或多个。某些症状 —— 如半身不遂 —— 并不常见，而另一些 —— 如呼吸急促 —— 很可能发生。下列情况中，哪一个更可能发生呢？是血栓患者只表现出半身不遂，还是患者同时表现出半身不遂且呼吸急促？卡尼曼和特沃斯基发现，91% 的医生相信，血栓仅仅导致一种罕见症状的可能性，要小于导致一种罕见症状加一种常见症状的可能性。（这些医生为自己辩解说，患者并不会走进诊室就跟医生说「我的肺里有个血栓，猜猜我有啥症状」之类的话。）

多年后，卡尼曼的一名学生与另一名研究者一道，发现律师在进行案情判断时，也沦为这一谬误的受害者。不论是刑事案还是民事案，当事人一般都要通过律师了解进入审判程序后可能发生的情况。无罪或调解或数额不等的赔偿，各自的可能性有多少？尽管律师不会用具体的概率值表达意见，却会就各种结果的相对可能性做出个人的预估，并据此提出建议。在这种情况下，研究者同样发现，律师认为那些细节更丰富的描述，其发生概率更高。在葆拉·琼斯对时任总统克林顿的民事诉讼中，有人请 200 名执业律师对案子不会走完全部司法程序的可能性进行预测。对其中一些受试者，诉讼提前结束的可能性被分解为各种具体的原因，例如调解、撤回指控或被法官驳回；而对其他受试者，则只要求他们简单地进行是与否的预测。研究者通过对比发现，被提供了案子提前结束的具体原因的一组受试者，更倾向于预测审理将早早结束。

对周围环境中各种现象之间有意义的联系进行评判的能力如此重要，以至在某些情况下，即使我们实际追寻的东西不过是海市蜃楼般的幻影，也值得我们为之付出。假设一个饥饿的穴居人看到远处岩石上有一点儿模糊的绿色，他可以选择置之不理，结果错过了一条肥美可口的蜥蜴；他也可以跑过去发起突袭，却发现那实际上只是几片稻草叶。不过前一种做法的代价显然更大。因此，根据这个理论，我们可能已经在进化的筛选下，以偶尔犯下第二种错误为代价，来避免后果更加严重的第一种错误。

在数学发展的历程中，古希腊人扮演了现代数学处理方式发明人的角色。这种处理方式就是：公理、证明、定理、更多的证明、更多的定理，以此类推。但到了 20 世纪 30 年代，原籍奥地利的美国数学家哥德尔 —— 同时也是爱因斯坦的朋友 —— 证明了这种处理方式存在缺陷。根据他的证明，大多数数学要么自相矛盾，要么一定包含某些无法证明的真理。但数学仍然毫无争议地按照古希腊或欧几里得的方式前进着。古希腊这些几何天才创造了一个小小的公理集，也就是那些无须证明就被接受的陈述，然后根据它们，证明得到许多美丽的定理，详细给出线、面、三角形与其他几何形状的性质。比如，他们根据这些知识认识到地球是一个球体，甚至还计算出它的半径。人们一定会想，为什么这样一个文明能够产生诸如欧几里得《几何原本》第一卷之命题 29「一条直线与两条平行直线相交，则所成的内错角相等，同位角相等，且同旁内角之和等于两直角」这样的定理，却未能创造一个理论，证明在扔两个骰子时，把你的雪佛兰科尔维特跑车押在扔出两个 6 点上是个很不明智的做法。

事实上，古希腊人没有科尔维特跑车，也没有骰子。不过他们确实有赌瘾，还有着数量足够的被宰杀的牲畜。因此，他们玩的是由牲畜的踵骨制成的距骨。一个距骨有 6 面，但落下后只能停在其中的 4 个面上。现代学者注意到，由于距骨本身的构造，它停在这 4 个面上的机会并不均等：停在其中两个面的机会大概各有 10%，而停在另两个面的机会各有 40%。一种常见的距骨游戏要使用 4 个距骨，而最好的结果是扔出的 4 个面都不相同（称一个维纳斯）。这种情况很罕见，但并非最罕见。扔出维纳斯的可能性约为 384/10000，不过缺少随机性理论的古希腊人并不知道这一点。

在寻求神谕时，古希腊人也使用距骨。提问者能从神谕中得到据称是来自神灵本身的回答。历史学家希罗多德以及荷马、埃斯库罗斯和索福克勒斯这些作家的记述表明，许多杰出的古希腊人的许多重要抉择，都是根据神谕做出的。尽管距骨在赌博和宗教中的地位如此重要，但是古希腊人从未试图理解距骨游戏中的规律。

为什么古希腊人没能发展出概率论？一个原因在于许多古希腊人相信，未来是按神的意志发展的。如果扔距骨的结果意味着「跟那个在学校木板房后的摔跤比赛中把你牢牢扣住的又矮又壮的斯巴达姑娘结婚」，古希腊人不会觉得这只不过是随机过程中的一个走运（或不走运）的结果，而只会视其为神的旨意。按照这种看法，通过理解随机性寻找答案的做法根本就是南辕北辙。因此在这种观念下，似乎不太可能诞生对随机性进行数学预测的理论。而另一个原因大概恰恰就是那个使古希腊人成为伟大数学家的哲学观念：他们执着于通过逻辑和公理证明所得的绝对真理，对不确定的命题却眉头紧蹙。例如，在柏拉图《对话录·斐多篇》中，西米阿斯对苏格拉底说，「有关似然性的论证都是骗人的东西」，并指出，「除非在使用过程中非常谨慎，否则它们很容易具有欺骗性 —— 不管是在几何中还是在其他事情上」。这个说法正好预见了卡尼曼和特沃斯基的工作。而在《泰阿泰德篇》中，苏格拉底说，任何「在几何中使用概率和似然性论证」的数学家「都称不上第一流」。不过，就算古希腊人认为概率学家能够配得上第一流的称号，但在无法保存大规模记录的当时，要创造出一个自洽的概率理论仍然十分困难，因为如果我们想根据过往的历史估计事件发生的频率以及概率，就会发现人的记忆力实在是差得可怜。

所有长度为 6 个字母且第五个字母为 n 的英文单词，和所有以 ing 结尾的有 6 个字母的英文单词，哪一个更多？大多数人选择了后者。为什么呢？因为相较于一般的第五个字母为 n 的 6 个字母的单词，人们更容易记起以 ing 结尾的单词。但我们不必查《牛津英语词典》—— 甚至也不用知道如何数数 —— 就可以证明这个猜测是错误的：第五个字母为 n 的 6 个字母的单词必然包含所有以 ing 结尾的 6 个字母的单词。心理学家称这类错误为易取性偏误，因为在重构过去时，我们对那些最为生动从而也最容易回想起来的事物，赋予了无来由的重要性。

易取性偏误的可恶之处，在于它扭曲了我们对过往以及周围事物的认知，从而偷偷地扭曲了我们对世界的看法。举例来说，人们总是倾向于高估无家可归者中精神疾病患者的比例，因为当我们碰到一个行为正常的无家可归者时，我们并不会留意他，跟朋友们聊天时也不会提到这个凑巧遇见的不起眼的人；但如果我们碰到的流浪者边走路边重重地跺脚，口中唱着《圣者进行曲》，还朝着并不存在的同伴挥舞手臂，那么我们的确更容易对他印象深刻。杂货店有 5 个收银台，而你正好排到了结账最慢的那一队，这种可能性有多大？除非你被下了咒，否则这个可能性大概是 1/5。可为什么在事后回想时，你总觉得有一种超自然的力量让你选中了那一队呢？那是因为当一切都天下太平时，你只会把注意力集中到其他更重要的事情上。但如果排在你前面的那位购物车里只放了一件商品的女士，一定要搞清楚为什么她买的鸡肉是 1.5 美元，而肉品柜台中的标价是 1.49 美元，那么这件事一定令你难以忘却。

在一个模拟审判中，易取性偏误对判断和决策可能造成的影响得到彻底的展示。在这项研究中，一名司机被指控因醉驾撞上一辆垃圾车。在陪审团得到的证据里，支持和推翻这个指控的证据分量相等。关键在于其中一组陪审员得到的无罪证据十分「苍白」：垃圾车车主在质询中承认，他的车是灰色的，因此在夜间很难被看到。而另一组陪审员得到的是一个更「生动」的版本：垃圾车车主在质询中承认，他的车是灰色的，因此在夜间很难被看到。车主强调说，他的车之所以是灰色的，是因为「灰色不显脏，不然你想要我怎么样，把它漆成粉红色」？有罪证据同样有两个版本，只不过给第一组的是「生动版」，而第二组的是「苍白版」。这些陪审员被要求给出一个有罪 / 无罪的分值，而说明生动的一方总是会胜出。如果裁决时间被延期 48 小时，这种由于描述的生动性造成的影响就更加明显了（大概是因为此时需要回忆更为久远的事情）。

如果我们希望从过去的事情中获得有意义的结果，那么易取性偏误通过扭曲对过去的看法使这一努力被复杂化了。对我们如此，对古希腊人也如此。不过古希腊人在通往可能出现的随机性理论的道路上，还另有一个重大也是非常实在的阻碍：尽管基本概率只需要用到算术，但是古希腊人不懂算术，至少不懂那种形式便于使用的算术。举例来说，公元前 5 世纪，在处于希腊文明巅峰的雅典，人们用字母代码来记数。希腊字母表的 24 个字母中，前 9 个字母代表了我们称为 1 到 9 的 9 个数字；接下去的 9 个字母则代表 10、20、30 等等；而最后的 6 个字母加上 3 个额外的符号代表前 9 个整百数（100、200…900）。如果你到现在仍然觉得做算术挺麻烦的，那么试试从 ΩΨΠ 中减去 ΔΓΘ 吧！更糟的是，当时根本没人在乎这些个位、十位和百位数的书写次序：有时百位数被写在最前面，有时又在最后面，有时根本就没什么次序。最后一点：古希腊没有数字 0。

直到亚历山大大帝于公元前 331 年侵入巴比伦时，古希腊才有了 0 的概念，但即便亚历山大大帝已经开始用 0 表示一个数的缺失，它也没有被作为一个普通数字来使用。现代数学中的数字 0 有两个关键性质：在加法中，它是唯一不改变被加数值的数；而在乘法中，它是唯一与任何数相乘却不改变自身值的数。这个概念直到公元 9 世纪才由印度数学家摩诃毗罗引入。

哪怕是在可用的记数方式出现之后，人们也需要若干世纪才开始将加减乘除作为算术的基本运算，并逐步认识到一个便利的符号系统能使这些运算变得更为容易。因此，直到 16 世纪，西方世界才真正为概率论的发展做好准备。不过，在理解随机性的方向上迈出第一步的，却是古希腊人的征服者 —— 罗马人，尽管他们笨拙的计算体系仍然是一个障碍。

罗马人对数学通常是不屑一顾的，至少对古希腊人数学的态度是如此。用罗马政治家西塞罗（公元前 106 年至前 43 年）的话来说：「希腊人赋予几何学家以最高荣誉；相应地，在希腊人创造的事物中，没有什么是比数学更为辉煌的东西了。但作为数学这门技艺的极致，我们确立了它在测量与计数中的实用性。」的确，如果说古希腊人的教科书注重抽象三角形的全等性证明，那么一本典型的罗马教材会关注如何在敌人占据着对岸时确定河流宽度之类的事情。正是由于侧重点不同，当我们看到在古希腊人中诞生了阿基米德、丢番图、欧几里得、欧多克索斯、毕达哥拉斯和泰勒斯等数学巨星，而在罗马人中却没有产生哪怕一位数学家时，我们也就不觉得奇怪了。在罗马文化中，享乐与战争 —— 而非真理和美 —— 占据着中心地位。也正是因为注重实用，罗马人看到了概率的价值。一方面罗马人不觉得抽象几何有什么用处，另一方面西塞罗却写道：「偶然性正是生活之向导。」

西塞罗或许是古典时期最伟大的概率大师。对于赌博的胜利来自神的干预这一当时为人普遍接受的解释，西塞罗使用概率加以反驳。他写道：「那些经常赌博的人迟早都会扔出一次维纳斯；而不时地，他们也的确能连着扔出两次甚至三次维纳斯。但我们难道就准备因此而低能地确信，这种事情的发生是因为维纳斯的亲自介入，而不是因为纯粹的好运气？」西塞罗相信，即使某事件的发生只是纯运气的结果，它也可以被预计和预测。他甚至使用统计论证奚落人们对星相学的迷信。尽管星相学在罗马是非法的，但它仍然活了下来，而且活得还很不错。这可惹恼了西塞罗。他注意到公元前 216 年在坎尼，汉尼拔率领约 5 万迦太基及其盟国部队，将一支人数远超自身的罗马军队击溃，并杀死了 8 万罗马士兵中的 6 万人。「难道所有在坎尼倒下的罗马人，他们的占星结果都一样？」西塞罗这样问道，「但他们最终的命运都相同。」数千年后，《自然》杂志上发表了一项关于星相学预测的正确性的研究，这项研究得出同样的结论。如果西塞罗知道这一点的话，他一定会大感振奋。另一方面，今天的《纽约邮报》却建议我要客观地看待批评，并相应做出或许必要的任何改变，仅仅因为我是射手座。

西塞罗在随机性领域留下的主要遗产，就是他使用的 probabilis 这一术语 —— 我们现在使用的「概率」一词的词源。不过，查士丁尼大帝在公元 6 世纪编撰的《罗马民法大全》，才是概率一词作为领域常用语而出现的首份文本。要正确理解罗马人为何把数学思想应用到法律理论中，就必须了解有关历史的来龙去脉：黑暗时代的罗马法是依照日耳曼部落的做法制定的。说实话，这并没有什么不好。举个做证方面的例子，假设有一名丈夫现在被指控和为他妻子做外袍的织娘有染，但他对此完全否认，那么他的证词的真实性，并非取决于他能否经受住一场尖锐控辩中的种种严厉盘问，而是看他能不能一口咬定这个说法，哪怕当烧红的铁块烙在身上时也绝不改口。（如果我们把这个习俗再带回到现在的法律中，相信通过庭外调解来解决的离婚案会多很多。）如果一名被告说马车夫根本就没想让车停下来，而另一名专家证人却说，蹄印表明车夫已经勒住了马缰绳，那么日耳曼人的条令就为打破这种僵持给出一个简单的办法：让两边各挑出一个人来，用矛和盾干一仗，输者即做伪证者，要被砍去右手。

为了给这种单纯基于武力的审判方式提供一种替代，或至少是提供一些补充，罗马人试图以数学的精确，来解救这种陈旧而武断的体系的不足。从这个历史背景来看，罗马人所持有的公正的概念中，已经包含了非常先进的智力理念。罗马人认识到证据和证词之间常常会互相矛盾，同时罗马人还认识到，解决这些矛盾的最好方法莫过于将无法避免的不确定性因素加以量化。正是基于这样的认识，罗马人创造出「半证据」的概念，并在那些没有完全可靠的理由被采信或被拒绝采信证言证据的案件中加以应用。在一些案件中，涉及证据的罗马律令甚至还包含更为精细的规定。例如教令规定：「主教不应被判有罪，除非有 72 名证人证明他有罪…… 司铎枢机不应被判有罪，除非有 44 名证人做证；罗马城的助祭枢机不应被判有罪，除非有 36 名证人做证；副助祭、侍僧、驱魔人、诵经人或看门人不应被判有罪，除非有 7 名证人做证。」犯罪嫌疑人如果自己想在这样的条文下被认定有罪，那么他不仅要犯下被指控的罪行，还得卖票请人到罪案现场观摩指点，才能凑齐足够的证人。不过，尽管存在这些不足，能够认识到不同证词的真实性也可能不同，并且认识到有必要找到规则对这些不同的真实性组合进行最终的判断，这本身就是一个很好的开端。于是，恰恰是在看来不大可能的罗马审判庭上，诞生了一套基于概率的系统化规则。

不幸的是，蹒跚于 VIII 和 XIV 这样的数字之中的算术，仍然难以灵活地使用各种数量。尽管罗马法开始具备一定的法律理性和自洽性，但是最终还是缺乏数学上的有效性。例如，在罗马法中，两个「半证据」就可以构成一个完整的证据。对于一个还不习惯量化思考方式的头脑而言，这听起来还是蛮合理的。不过在分数运算已经为人熟知的今天，这就有问题了：如果两个半证据可以构成一个完全确定的证据，那么三个半证据会得出什么结果？根据概率组合的正确方式，不仅两个半证据只能给出一个仍然不确定的证据，而且任意有限多个只具有部分可靠性的证据加在一起，仍然不可能给出一个完全确定的证据：因为将概率组合起来的运算，不是加法，而是乘法。

这就是我们的下一条定律 —— 概率组合规则： 如果两个可能事件 A 与 B 相互独立，则 A 与 B 同时发生的概率，等于各自单独发生的概率的乘积。假设一名已婚者平均每年有约 1/50 的可能性会离婚，而一名警察每年有约 1/5000 的机会殉职，那么一名已婚警察在同一年离婚并殉职的可能性有多大？根据上面的规则，如果这两个事件相互独立，则概率约为 1/50×1/5000=1/250000。当然这两个事件并非独立，而是互有关联的：如果你死了（真倒霉！）就没办法离婚了。因此，碰到这种霉运透顶的情况的可能性，实际要比二十五万分之一还要少一点儿。

为什么是相乘而不是相加呢？现在让我们假设，你做了一套卡片，卡片上印着你迄今为止通过婚恋网站相亲见过面的 100 位男士。这些家伙在个人网页上挂着的照片个个如同汤姆·克鲁斯，实际却跟丹尼·德维托有的一拼；再假设在每张照片的背面，你都记下了与此人有关的一些数据，比如诚不诚实，或者有没有魅力等；最后，再假设这些你希望中的柏拉图式的恋人，在诚实和魅力等每一项指标上，都有 1/10 的可能性得到一个肯定的评价。那么，你收藏的这 100 个人，在诚实和魅力两项上都合格的人有多少呢？让我们先考查诚实这个指标。（当然，先考查魅力也是一样的。）既然有 1/10 的照片我们在诚实这一项的评分上是「是」，那么在 100 张照片中就有 10 张这类的照片；而在这 10 张照片中，被评价为有魅力的又有几张呢？那就再来 1/10，也就是硕果仅存的 1 张照片。第一个 1/10 将可能的选择减少到所有照片的 1/10，第二个 1/10 进一步将可能选择的数量降到了 1/10 的 1/10，也就是 1/100。这就是使用乘法的原因。因此，如果你的要求不仅仅是诚实和有魅力，你就得一直这样乘下去，所以…… 好吧，祝你好运！

继续我们的话题之前，有一个重要的细节值得再看一次： 如果两个可能事件 A 与 B 相互独立 。假设航班上只剩下一个座位，但还有两名乘客可能会登机。进一步假设，由以往经验可知，预订了座位的旅客中，有 2/3 确实会乘坐航班。根据乘法规则，登机口的乘务人员可以算出，大概有 2/3×2/3 即约 44% 的可能性，她将面对一位满脸不快的顾客。另一方面，因为两名乘客都没来而使飞机带着一个空座位起飞的可能性是 1/3×1/3，或者只有约 11%。但这个结果是在两名乘客的到来与否相互独立的假设下得到的。如果他们是同路的旅伴，上面的分析就错了：两人同时乘机的可能性跟其中一个人来乘机的可能性是一样的，都是 2/3。因此，一定要记住，利用乘法将单个概率组合成复合概率的做法，只有在这些事件的发生不以任何方式相互依赖时，才是正确的。

我们方才使用的规则，也可用于有关半证据的罗马法中：两个独立的半证据同时都不成立的可能性是 1/4，因此两个半证据构成的不是一个完整证据，而是完整证据的 3/4。在该用乘法的地方，罗马人用了加法。

但在某些情况下，如果我们希望知道的是两个事件中至少有一个会发生的概率，而不是两者同时发生的概率，那么此时概率必须相加。这就是下一条定律： 如果一个事件有多个不同且互不重叠的可能结果 A 、 B 、 C 等，那么结果 A 或结果 B 发生的可能性，等于结果 A 和结果 B 各自单独发生的概率之和，而所有可能结果（ A 、 B 、 C 等）各自单独发生的概率之和等于 1（即 100%）。如果你想知道两个独立事件 A 与 B 同时发生的可能性，就用乘法；如果想知道两个互斥事件 A 或 B 发生的可能性，就用加法。回到客机的问题上：登机口的乘务员何时应该把概率相加而非相乘呢？如果她想知道的是两名乘客都来或都不来的可能性，就应该用加法将两个概率相加，根据之前的计算可知，这个概率是 55%。

这三条定律虽然简单，却构成了概率论的大部分基础。如果使用得当，我们就能更好地洞察自然及日常世界的运作。在平时的决策中，我们一直在使用这些定律，但跟罗马人一样，我们的用法并不总是恰当的。

看看过去，不以为然地摇摇头，然后写下《腐化堕落的罗马人》（美国学乐出版社，1994）这类标题的书，并不是什么难事。但为了不让我们毫无缘由地自满自得起来，现在来看看在司法系统中，我们迄今所讨论的这些基本定律的一些应用，并以之作为本章的结束。下面这些讨论所揭示的东西，应该足以让任何沉醉于文化优越感的人冷静下来。

一个好消息是，我们不再有所谓半证据了。不过我们确实有着类似于 999000/1000000 证据这样的东西。举例来说，我们常常会看到 DNA（脱氧核糖核酸）分析专家在罪案庭审中出庭做证，称在罪案现场所获取的 DNA 样本与某犯罪嫌疑人的 DNA 样本相匹配。这些匹配有多确定呢？在最开始引入 DNA 证据时，不少专家证明说 DNA 检验不可能存在假阳性。如今的 DNA 专家一般认为，随机选一个人，其 DNA 与罪案中的样本匹配的可能性，不到百万分之一或十亿分之一。在这样的可能性下，如果法官产生「让这家伙死在牢里」的想法，那么人们也很难去责怪他。但是另外还有一个统计数据，这个数据通常是不会告知陪审团的，那就是整个实验操作过程中可能出错的数据。例如，在采集和使用样本时，样本无意间可能会被混到一起或颠倒了，或者实验结果被曲解，又或者结果报告出了错。这些错误都很少发生，却远非随机匹配那样罕见。例如费城犯罪实验室就承认，曾在一起强奸案中不慎对调了被告和受害人的参考样本，而基因检测公司 Cellmark Diagnostics 也承认犯过类似的错误。不幸的是，法庭出示的有关 DNA 匹配的统计数据如此有力，以致尽管有 11 名证人提供了不在场证据，俄克拉何马州的一个法庭仍将一位名叫蒂莫西·达拉谟的男子处以超过 3100 年的徒刑。后来才发现，在最初的分析中，实验室未能将强奸犯的 DNA 和达拉谟的 DNA 从被检液体中完全分离，当对两者的 DNA 进行比较时，就得出阳性结果。这个错误后来在重检中被发现，达拉谟因此获释，但此时他已经在监狱中待了近 4 年。

关于人为因素造成的错误率，不同的人给出的估计值也有所不同，但许多专家认为它大致是百分之一左右。不过，由于许多实验室的错误率从未被测量，因此法庭通常不会接受此类统计值作为证据。就算法庭接受了这些有关假阳性的证据，陪审员又会怎样评判它们的效力呢？多数陪审员都会假设，在给定了两类错误概率 —— 十亿分之一的随机匹配概率和百分之一的因实验室误操作造成的匹配概率 —— 后，总错误率应是两者之间的某个值，比如五百万分之一，对大多数陪审员而言，这个概率仍不足以让人合理质疑。不过，通过概率论的计算法则，却能得到一个非常不同的结果。

求解思路如下：既然两种错误都非常罕见，那么我们可以忽略随机匹配和实验室错误同时发生的可能性，只看发生其中一个或另一个错误的可能性。由加法法则可得，该可能性为实验室错误的概率（百分之一）+ 随机匹配的概率（十亿分之一）。由于前者比后者大 1000 万倍，因此，我们可以用两者中较大的概率，即百分之一，来很好地近似表示这两个概率之和。也就是说，在给定这两种可能的错误源后，我们应当忽视那些自负的专家给出的那个随机匹配错误率，而将注意力集中在可能性大得多的实验室人为错误上。可这恰恰就是法庭通常不允许律师提供的那个数据！因此，那些被再三重复的 DNA 检验是绝对可靠的说法，实际上是一种过分夸张的说法。

这并非孤例。数学应用于现代法律体系时所碰到的问题，一点儿都不比几百年前罗马法庭碰到的问题小。最能展示概率在法律中的应用和误用的著名案例之一，就是 1968 年在加利福尼亚州最高法院审理的「人民诉柯林斯」案。以下就是法庭在裁决时所掌握的有关本案的一些事实。

1964 年 6 月 18 日，大约上午 11：30，刚买完东西的胡安妮塔·布鲁克斯夫人，正沿着洛杉矶城圣佩德罗区的一条小巷回家。她当时拖着一个柳条筐小车，里面放着购买的杂货，钱包就放在购物袋顶上。她用一根藤条拖着小车。当弯腰去捡一个空硬纸盒时，她突然被人推倒在地。她既没有看见这个人，也没有听见其走近。她在摔倒时感到一阵晕眩和疼痛，但仍然挣扎着看到一名年轻女子正从现场跑开。根据布鲁克斯夫人的陈述，这名年轻女子看上去大约重 145 磅 ，穿着「深色的什么衣服」，有着「介于暗金黄色和亮金黄色」的发色，但比被告珍妮特·柯林斯上庭时的发色要深。事情发生后，布鲁克斯夫人马上发现她装有 35～40 美元现金的钱包不见了。

与劫案发生差不多同一时间，居住在小巷街尾的约翰·巴斯，正在屋前给草坪浇水。小巷中传来的「许多喊声和尖叫声」吸引了他的注意。当朝那个方向看过去时，他见到一名女子从巷子里跑出来，并跳上了街对面的一辆黄色汽车。他无法给出这辆汽车的车牌号和型号。汽车马上发动，绕了一大圈绕过另一辆停着的车，而在这条窄路上绕圈时，它一度离巴斯仅 6 英尺 远。巴斯看到开车的是一名黑人男子，留着大胡子和小胡子…… 其他证人则分别描述该车为黄色、黄色带灰白车顶和黄色带蛋壳白色车顶。该车据描述为中到大型车。

事情发生几天后，一名洛杉矶警官在柯林斯夫妇的家门前发现了一辆黄色带灰白车顶的林肯车，他与这对儿夫妻交谈，说明自己正在调查一起抢劫案。他注意到这对儿夫妻很符合目击者对那两个犯下罪行的男女的描述，只是现在这名男子没有大胡子，不过他承认他有时会留大胡子。当天晚些时候，洛杉矶警察逮捕了这两名犯罪嫌疑人 —— 马尔科姆·柯林斯和他的妻子珍妮特。

指控夫妻俩的证据并不充分，因此，该案在很大程度上依赖于受害人与证人巴斯对犯罪嫌疑人的认定。对于检方而言很不幸的是，受害人与证人都算不上证人席上的模范。受害人无法认定珍妮特就是罪犯，也根本没见过那名开车的司机；巴斯没见过抢劫者，而且在警察局给出的一列待指认者中，也不能确认马尔科姆就是那名司机。这件案子看似无法进行下去了。

随后，本案的明星证人登场了。根据加利福尼亚州最高法院判决书中的描述，该证人不过是「一所州立大学的数学讲师」。据其证词，被告是「一名金发梳马尾辫的白人女子……（以及）一名留有大胡子的黑人男子」这一事实，就足以给法庭上的夫妻俩定罪了。为了说明这一观点，检方给出下面的表格，我从最高法院判决中逐字引用如下：

检方传唤的这名数学讲师，将乘法规则应用在这组数据中，由此得到的结论是，出现一对儿符合所有这些不同特征的夫妻，其概率是一千二百万分之一。证人据此认为，法庭上这对夫妻无辜的概率就是一千二百万分之一。检方随即指出，这些独立的概率都是估计值，并请陪审员用自己的估计值做做这道算术题。检察官称，他本人相信这些值都是相当保守的估计，如果用他自己的估计值，那么得到的概率更接近十亿分之一。陪审团接受了这一结果，认定夫妻俩罪名成立。

这个计算错在何处呢？首先，正如我们已经看到的，要通过各组成概率相乘得到复合概率，这些组成概率对应的范畴应相互独立，而在本案中，所列特征明显不是相互独立的。例如，表中称看到一名「留大胡子的黑人男子」的可能性是 1/10，而看到一名「留小胡子的男子」的机会是 1/4，但大多数留大胡子的男子同样留小胡子。因此，如果你看到一名「留大胡子的黑人男子」，那么此人同时留着小胡子的可能性不再是 1/4，而是远大于这个值。我们可以通过剔除「留大胡子的黑人男子」这个特征纠正上述问题，此时得到的概率乘积约为百万分之一。

法庭的分析还有一个错误：真正与案件有关的并不是上面所给的那个概率，即随机选出一对儿夫妻，他们符合对犯罪嫌疑人的描述的概率。真正相关的概率应该是，一对儿符合所有上述特征的夫妻，他们有罪的可能性到底是多少？前一个概率可能是百万分之一，但对后者而言，由于与案发地相邻的区域中有数百万人口，因此，我们可以合理地估计，这一地区有 2～3 对儿夫妻符合上述描述。此时，如果仅根据前面的证据（这些证据差不多也就是检方掌握的所有材料了）判决符合描述的夫妻有罪，这个判决正确的可能性不过是 1/2 或 1/3。这样的概率根本不足以对犯罪嫌疑人合理质疑。由于这些原因，最高法院最终推翻了对柯林斯的定罪。

在现代法庭中使用概率和统计，这仍然是一个有争议的话题。在柯林斯案中，加利福尼亚州最高法院嘲弄了所谓的「数学审判」，却向更多「数学方法的恰当应用」敞开了大门。在其后的若干年里，法庭很少考虑数学论据。但即使律师与法官们没有显性地使用概率或数学定理，他们也确实经常采用这类推理，陪审员在判断证据的有力程度时的做法也一样。不仅如此，由于有必要对 DNA 证据的效力进行评价，统计论据正变得越来越重要。不幸的是，这种不断增长的重要性，并未促使律师、法官或陪审团对概率的理解随之增长。如同在南加利福尼亚州大学教授概率与法律学的托马斯·里昂解释的那样：「没有几个学生会在法律课上使用概率，也没有几个律师觉得概率在其中应该占有一席之地。」如同在其他领域一样，在法律中，对随机性的理解可以揭示隐藏的真理，但这只是对那些掌握了这个真理发掘工具的人才成立。下一章我们将聊聊系统化研究这些工具的第一人。