# 2020078The-Drunkards-WalkR02

## 记忆时间

## 目录

0301 Finding Your Way through a Space of Possibilities

0401 Tracking the Pathways to Success

## 0301. Finding Your Way through a Space of Possibilities

IN THE YEARS leading up to 1576, an oddly attired old man could be found roving with a strange, irregular gait up and down the streets of Rome, shouting occasionally to no one in particular and being listened to by no one at all. He had once been celebrated throughout Europe, a famous astrologer, physician to nobles of the court, chair of medicine at the University of Pavia. He had created enduring inventions, including a forerunner of the combination lock and the universal joint, which is used in automobiles today. He had published 131 books on a wide range of topics in philosophy, medicine, mathematics, and science. In 1576, however, he was a man with a past but no future, living in obscurity and abject poverty. In the late summer of that year he sat at his desk and wrote his final words, an ode to his favorite son, his oldest, who had been executed sixteen years earlier, at age twenty-six. The old man died on September 20, a few days shy of his seventy-fifth birthday. He had outlived two of his three children; at his death his surviving son was employed by the Inquisition as a professional torturer. That plum job was a reward for having given evidence against his father.

Before his death, Gerolamo Cardano burned 170 unpublished manuscripts.1 Those sifting through his possessions found 111 that survived. One, written decades earlier and, from the looks of it, often revised, was a treatise of thirty-two short chapters. Titled The Book on Games of Chance, it was the first book ever written on the theory of randomness. People had been gambling and coping with other uncertainties for thousands of years. Can I make it across the desert before I die of thirst? Is it dangerous to remain under the cliff while the earth is shaking like this? Does that grin from the cave girl who likes to paint buffaloes on the sides of rocks mean she likes me? Yet until Cardano came along, no one had accomplished a reasoned analysis of the course that games or other uncertain processes take. Cardano's insight into how chance works came embodied in a principle we shall call the law of the sample space. The law of the sample space represented a new idea and a new methodology and has formed the basis of the mathematical description of uncertainty in all the centuries that followed. It is a simple methodology, a laws-of-chance analog of the idea of balancing a checkbook. Yet with this simple method we gain the ability to approach many problems systematically that would otherwise prove almost hopelessly confusing. To illustrate both the use and the power of the law, we shall consider a problem that although easily stated and requiring no advanced mathematics to solve, has probably stumped more people than any other in the history of randomness.

AS NEWSPAPER COLUMNS GO, Parade magazine's「Ask Marilyn」has to be considered a smashing success. Distributed in 350 newspapers and boasting a combined circulation of nearly 36 million, the question-and-answer column originated in 1986 and is still going strong. The questions can be as enlightening as the answers, an (unscientific) Gallup Poll of what is on Americans' minds. For instance:

When the stock market closes at the end of the day, why does everyone stand around smiling and clapping regardless of whether the stocks are up or down?

A friend is pregnant with twins that she knows are fraternal. What are the chances that at least one of the babies is a girl?

When you drive by a dead skunk in the road, why does it take about 10 seconds before you smell it? Assume that you did not actually drive over the skunk.

Apparently Americans are a very practical people. The thing to note here is that each of the queries has a certain scientific or mathematical component to it, a characteristic of many of the questions answered in the column.

One might ask, especially if one knows a little something about mathematics and science,「Who is this guru Marilyn?」Well, Marilyn is Marilyn vos Savant, famous for being listed for years in the Guinness World Records Hall of Fame as the person with the world's highest recorded IQ (228). She is also famous for being married to Robert Jarvik, inventor of the Jarvik artificial heart. But sometimes famous people, despite their other accomplishments, are remembered for something they wished had never happened (「I did not have sexual relations with that woman」). That may be the case for Marilyn, who is most famous for her response to the following question, which appeared in her column one Sunday in September 1990 (I have altered the wording slightly):

Suppose the contestants on a game show are given the choice of three doors: Behind one door is a car; behind the others, goats. After a contestant picks a door, the host, who knows what's behind all the doors, opens one of the unchosen doors, which reveals a goat. He then says to the contestant,「Do you want to switch to the other unopened door?」Is it to the contestant's advantage to make the switch?2

The question was inspired by the workings of the television game show Let's Make a Deal, which ran from 1963 to 1976 and in several incarnations from 1980 to 1991. The show's main draw was its handsome, amiable host, Monty Hall, and his provocatively clad assistant, Carol Merrill, Miss Azusa (California) of 1957.

It had to come as a surprise to the show's creators that after airing 4,500 episodes in nearly twenty-seven years, it was this question of mathematical probability that would be their principal legacy. This issue has immortalized both Marilyn and Let's Make a Deal because of the vehemence with which Marilyn vos Savant's readers responded to the column. After all, it appears to be a pretty silly question. Two doors are available — open one and you win; open the other and you lose — so it seems self-evident that whether you change your choice or not, your chances of winning are 50/50. What could be simpler? The thing is, Marilyn said in her column that it is better to switch.

Despite the public's much-heralded lethargy when it comes to mathematical issues, Marilyn's readers reacted as if she'd advocated ceding California back to Mexico. Her denial of the obvious brought her an avalanche of mail, 10,000 letters by her estimate.3 If you ask the American people whether they agree that plants create the oxygen in the air, light travels faster than sound, or you cannot make radioactive milk safe by boiling it, you will get double-digit disagreement in each case (13 percent, 24 percent, and 35 percent, respectively).4 But on this issue, Americans were united: 92 percent agreed Marilyn was wrong.

Many readers seemed to feel let down. How could a person they trusted on such a broad range of issues be confused by such a simple question? Was her mistake a symbol of the woeful ignorance of the American people? Almost 1,000 PhDs wrote in, many of them math professors, who seemed to be especially irate.5「You blew it,」wrote a mathematician from George Mason University:

Let me explain: If one door is shown to be a loser, that information changes the probability of either remaining choice — neither of which has any reason to be more likely — to 1/2. As a professional mathematician, I'm very concerned with the general public's lack of mathematical skills. Please help by confessing your error and, in the future, being more careful.

From Dickinson State University came this:「I am in shock that after being corrected by at least three mathematicians, you still do not see your mistake.」From Georgetown:「How many irate mathematicians are needed to change your mind?」And someone from the U.S. Army Research Institute remarked,「If all those PhDs are wrong the country would be in serious trouble.」Responses continued in such great numbers and for such a long time that after devoting quite a bit of column space to the issue, Marilyn decided she would no longer address it.

The army PhD who wrote in may have been correct that if all those PhDs were wrong, it would be a sign of trouble. But Marilyn was correct. When told of this, Paul Erdös, one of the leading mathematicians of the twentieth century, said,「That's impossible.」Then, when presented with a formal mathematical proof of the correct answer, he still didn't believe it and grew angry. Only after a colleague arranged for a computer simulation in which Erdös watched hundreds of trials that came out 2 to 1 in favor of switching did Erdös concede he was wrong.6

How can something that seems so obvious be wrong? In the words of a Harvard professor who specializes in probability and statistics,「Our brains are just not wired to do probability problems very well.」7 The great American physicist Richard Feynman once told me never to think I understood a work in physics if all I had done was read someone else's derivation. The only way to really understand a theory, he said, is to derive it yourself (or perhaps end up disproving it!). For those of us who aren't Feynman, re-proving other people's work is a good way to end up untenured and plying our math skills as a checker at Home Depot. But the Monty Hall problem is one of those that can be solved without any specialized mathematical knowledge. You don't need calculus, geometry, algebra, or even amphetamines, which Erdös was reportedly fond of taking.8 (As legend has it, once after quitting for a month, he remarked,「Before, when I looked at a piece of blank paper my mind was filled with ideas. Now all I see is a blank piece of paper.」) All you need is a basic understanding of how probability works and the law of the sample space, that framework for analyzing chance situations that was first put on paper in the sixteenth century by Gerolamo Cardano.

GEROLAMO CARDANO was no rebel breaking forth from the intellectual milieu of sixteenth-century Europe. To Cardano a dog's howl portended the death of a loved one, and a few ravens croaking on the roof meant a grave illness was on its way. He believed as much as anyone else in fate, in luck, and in seeing your future in the alignment of planets and stars. Still, had he played poker, he wouldn't have been found drawing to an inside straight. For Cardano, gambling was second nature. His feeling for it was seated in his gut, not in his head, and so his understanding of the mathematical relationships among a game's possible random outcomes transcended his belief that owing to fate, any such insight is futile. Cardano's work also transcended the primitive state of mathematics in his day, for algebra and even arithmetic were yet in their stone age in the early sixteenth century, preceding even the invention of the equal sign.

History has much to say about Cardano, based on both his autobiography and the writings of some of his contemporaries. Some of the writings are contradictory, but one thing is certain: born in 1501, Gerolamo Cardano was not a child you'd have put your money on. His mother, Chiara, despised children, though — or perhaps because — she already had three boys. Short, stout, hot tempered, and promiscuous, she prepared a kind of sixteenth-century morning-after pill when she became pregnant with Gerolamo — a brew of wormwood, burned barleycorn, and tamarisk root. She drank it down in an attempt to abort the fetus. The brew sickened her, but the unborn Gerolamo was unfazed, perfectly content with whatever metabolites the concoction left in his mother's bloodstream. Her other attempts met with similar failure.

Chiara and Gerolamo's father, Fazio Cardano, were not married, but they often acted as if they were — they were known for their many loud quarrels. A month before Gerolamo's birth, Chiara left their home in Milan to live with her sister in Pavia, twenty miles to the south. Gerolamo emerged after three days of painful labor. One look at the infant and Chiara must have thought she would be rid of him after all. He was frail, and worse, lay silent. Chiara's midwife predicted he'd be dead within the hour. But if Chiara was thinking, good riddance, she was let down again, for the baby's wet nurse soaked him in a bath of warm wine, and Gerolamo revived. The infant's good health lasted only a few months, however. Then he, his nurse, and his three half brothers all came down with the plague. The Black Death, as the plague is sometimes called, is really three distinct diseases: bubonic, pneumonic, and septicemic plague. Cardano contracted bubonic, the most common, named for the buboes, the painful egg-size swellings of the lymph nodes that are one of the disease's prominent symptoms. Life expectancy, once buboes appeared, was about a week.

The Black Death had first entered Europe through a harbor in Messina in northeastern Sicily in 1347, carried by a Genoese fleet returning from the Orient.9 The fleet was quickly quarantined, and the entire crew died aboard the ship — but the rats survived and scurried ashore, carrying both the bacteria and the fleas that would spread them. The ensuing outbreak killed half the city within two months and, eventually, between 25 percent and 50 percent of the population of Europe. Successive epidemics kept coming, tamping down the population of Europe for centuries. The year 1501 was a bad one for the plague in Italy. Gerolamo's nurse and brothers died. The lucky baby got away with nothing but disfigurement: warts on his nose, forehead, cheeks, and chin. He was destined to live nearly seventy-five years. Along the way there was plenty of disharmony and, in his early years, a good many beatings.

Gerolamo's father was a bit of an operator. A sometime pal of Leonardo da Vinci's, he was by profession a geometer, never a profession that brought in much cash. Fazio often had trouble making the rent, so he started a consulting business, providing the highborn with advice on law and medicine. That enterprise eventually thrived, aided by Fazio's claim that he was descended from a brother of a fellow named Goffredo Castiglioni of Milan, better known as Pope Celestine IV. When Gerolamo reached the age of five, his father brought him into the business — in a manner of speaking. That is, he strapped a pannier to his son's back, stuffed it with heavy legal and medical books, and began dragging the young boy to meetings with his patrons all over town. Gerolamo would later write that「from time to time as we walked the streets my father would command me to stop while he opened a book and, using my head as a table, read some long passage, prodding me the while with his foot to keep still if I wearied of the great weight.」10

In 1516, Gerolamo decided his best opportunity lay in the field of medicine and announced that he wanted to leave his family's home in Milan and travel back to Pavia to study there. Fazio wanted him to study law, however, because then he would become eligible for an annual stipend of 100 crowns. After a huge family brawl, Fazio relented, but the question remained: without the stipend, how would Gerolamo support himself in Pavia? He began to save the money he earned reading horoscopes and tutoring pupils in geometry, alchemy, and astronomy. Somewhere along the way he noticed he had a talent for gambling, a talent that would bring him cash much faster than any of those other means.

For anyone interested in gambling in Cardano's day, every city was Las Vegas. On cards, dice, backgammon, even chess, wagers were made everywhere. Cardano classified these games according to two types: those that involved some strategy, or skill, and those that were governed by pure chance. In games like chess, Cardano risked being outplayed by some sixteenth-century Bobby Fischer. But when he bet on the fall of a couple of small cubes, his chances were as good as anyone else's. And yet in those games he did have an advantage, because he had developed a better understanding of the odds of winning in various situations than any of his opponents. And so for his entrée into the betting world, Cardano played the games of pure chance. Before long he had set aside over 1,000 crowns for his education — more than a decade's worth of the stipend his father wanted for him. In 1520 he registered as a student in Pavia. Soon after, he began to write down his theory of gambling.

LIVING WHEN HE DID, Cardano had the advantage of understanding many things that had been Greek to the Greeks, and to the Romans, for the Hindus had taken the first large steps toward employing arithmetic as a powerful tool. It was in that milieu that positional notation in base ten developed, and became standard, around A.D. 700.11 The Hindus also made great progress in the arithmetic of fractions — something crucial to the analysis of probabilities, since the chances of something occurring are always less than one. This Hindu knowledge was picked up by the Arabs and eventually brought to Europe. There the first abbreviations, p for「plus」and m for「minus,」were used in the fifteenth century. The symbols + and - were introduced around the same time by the Germans, but only to indicate excess and deficient weights of chests. It gives one a feeling for some of the challenges Cardano faced to note that the equal sign did not yet exist, to be invented in 1557 by Robert Recorde of Oxford and Cambridge, who, inspired by geometry, remarked that no things could be more nearly alike than parallel lines and hence decided that such lines should denote equality. And the symbol ×, for multiplication, attributable to an Anglican minister, didn't arrive on the scene until the seventeenth century.

Cardano's Book on Games of Chance covers card games, dice, backgammon, and astragali. It is not perfect. In its pages are reflected Cardano's character, his crazy ideas, his wild temper, the passion with which he approached every undertaking — and the turbulence of his life and times. It considers only processes — such as the toss of a die or the dealing of a playing card — in which one outcome is as likely as another. And some points Cardano gets wrong. Still, The Book on Games of Chance represents a beachhead, the first success in the human quest to understand the nature of uncertainty. And Cardano's method of attacking questions of chance is startling both in its power and in its simplicity.

Not all the chapters of Cardano's book treat technical issues. For instance, chapter 26 is titled「Do Those Who Teach Well Also Play Well?」(he concludes,「It seems to be a different thing to know and to execute」). Chapter 29 is called「On the Character of Players」(「There are some who with many words drive both themselves and others from their proper senses」). These seem more「Dear Abby」than「Ask Marilyn.」But then there is chapter 14,「On Combined Points」(on possibilities). There Cardano states what he calls「a general rule」 — our law of the sample space.

The term sample space refers to the idea that the possible outcomes of a random process can be thought of as the points in a space. In simple cases the space might consist of just a few points, but in more complex situations it can be a continuum, just like the space we live in. Cardano didn't call it a space, however: the notion that a set of numbers could form a space was a century off, awaiting the genius of Descartes, his invention of coordinates, and his unification of algebra and geometry.

In modern language, Cardano's rule reads like this: Suppose a random process has many equally likely outcomes, some favorable (that is, winning), some unfavorable (losing). Then the probability of obtaining a favorable outcome is equal to the proportion of outcomes that are favorable. The set of all possible outcomes is called the sample space. In other words, if a die can land on any of six sides, those six outcomes form the sample space, and if you place a bet on, say, two of them, your chances of winning are 2 in 6.

A word on the assumption that all the outcomes are equally likely. Obviously that's not always true. The sample space for observing Oprah Winfrey's adult weight runs (historically) from 145 pounds to 237 pounds, and over time not all weight intervals have proved equally likely.12 The complication that different possibilities have different probabilities can be accounted for by associating the proper odds with each possible outcome — that is, by careful accounting. But for now we'll look at examples in which all outcomes are equally probable, like those Cardano analyzed.

The potency of Cardano's rule goes hand in hand with certain subtleties. One lies in the meaning of the term outcomes. As late as the eighteenth century the famous French mathematician Jean Le Rond d'Alembert, author of several works on probability, misused the concept when he analyzed the toss of two coins.13 The number of heads that turns up in those two tosses can be 0, 1, or 2. Since there are three outcomes, Alembert reasoned, the chances of each must be 1 in 3. But Alembert was mistaken.

One of the greatest deficiencies of Cardano's work was that he made no systematic analysis of the different ways in which a series of events, such as coin tosses, can turn out. As we shall see in the next chapter, no one did that until the following century. Still, a series of two coin tosses is simple enough that Cardano's methods are easily applied. The key is to realize that the possible outcomes of coin flipping are the data describing how the two coins land, not the total number of heads calculated from that data, as in Alembert's analysis. In other words, we should not consider 0, 1, or 2 heads as the possible outcomes but rather the sequences (heads, heads), (heads, tails), (tails, heads), and (tails, tails). These are the 4 possibilities that make up the sample space.

The next step, according to Cardano, is to sort through the outcomes, cataloguing the number of heads we can harvest from each. Only 1 of the 4 outcomes — (heads, heads) — yields 2 heads. Similarly, only (tails, tails) yields 0 heads. But if we desire 1 head, then 2 of the outcomes are favorable: (heads, tails) and (tails, heads). And so Cardano's method shows that Alembert was wrong: the chances are 25 percent for 0 or 2 heads but 50 percent for 1 head. Had Cardano laid his cash on 1 head at 3 to 1, he would have lost only half the time but tripled his money the other half, a great opportunity for a sixteenth-century kid trying to save up money for college — and still a great opportunity today if you can find anyone offering it.

A related problem often taught in elementary probability courses is the two-daughter problem, which is similar to one of the questions I quoted from the「Ask Marilyn」column. Suppose a mother is carrying fraternal twins and wants to know the odds of having two girls, a boy and a girl, and so on. Then the sample space consists of all the possible lists of the sexes of the children in their birth order: (girl, girl), (girl, boy), (boy, girl), and (boy, boy). It is the same as the space for the coin-toss problem except for the way we name the points: heads becomes girl, and tails becomes boy. Mathematicians have a fancy name for the situation in which one problem is another in disguise: they call it an isomorphism. When you find an isomorphism, it often means you've saved yourself a lot of work. In this case it means we can figure the chances that both children will be girls in exactly the same way we figured the chances of both tosses coming up heads in the coin-toss problem. And so without even doing the analysis, we know that the answer is the same: 25 percent. We can now answer the question asked in Marilyn's column: the chance that at least one of the babies will be a girl is the chance that both will be girls plus the chance that just one will be a girl — that is, 25 percent plus 50 percent, which is 75 percent.

In the two-daughter problem, an additional question is usually asked: What are the chances, given that one of the children is a girl, that both children will be girls? One might reason this way: since it is given that one of the children is a girl, there is only one child left to look at. The chance of that child's being a girl is 50 percent, so the probability that both children are girls is 50 percent.

That is not correct. Why? Although the statement of the problem says that one child is a girl, it doesn't say which one, and that changes things. If that sounds confusing, that's okay, because it provides a good illustration of the power of Cardano's method, which makes the reasoning clear.

The new information — one of the children is a girl — means that we are eliminating from consideration the possibility that both children are boys. And so, employing Cardano's approach, we eliminate the possible outcome (boy, boy) from the sample space. That leaves only 3 outcomes in the sample space: (girl, boy), (boy, girl), and (girl, girl). Of these, only (girl, girl) is the favorable outcome — that is, both children are daughters — so the chances that both children are girls is 1 in 3, or 33 percent. Now we can see why it matters that the statement of the problem didn't specify which child was a daughter. For instance, if the problem had asked for the chances of both children being girls given that the first child is a girl, then we would have eliminated both (boy, boy) and (boy, girl) from the sample space and the odds would have been 1 in 2, or 50 percent.

One has to give credit to Marilyn vos Savant, not only for attempting to raise public understanding of elementary probability but also for having the courage to continue to publish such questions even after her frustrating Monty Hall experience. We will end this discussion with another question taken from her column, this one from March 1996:

My dad heard this story on the radio. At Duke University, two students had received A's in chemistry all semester. But on the night before the final exam, they were partying in another state and didn't get back to Duke until it was over. Their excuse to the professor was that they had a flat tire, and they asked if they could take a make-up test. The professor agreed, wrote out a test, and sent the two to separate rooms to take it. The first question (on one side of the paper) was worth five points. Then they flipped the paper over and found the second question, worth 95 points:「which tire was it?」What was the probability that both students would say the same thing? My dad and I think it's 1 in 16. Is that right?14

No, it is not: If the students were lying, the correct probability of their choosing the same answer is 1 in 4 (if you need help to see why, you can look at the notes at the back of this book).15 And now that we're accustomed to decomposing a problem into lists of possibilities, we are ready to employ the law of the sample space to tackle the Monty Hall problem.

AS I SAID EARLIER, understanding the Monty Hall problem requires no mathematical training. But it does require some careful logical thought, so if you are reading this while watching Simpsons reruns, you might want to postpone one activity or the other. The good news is it goes on for only a few pages.

In the Monty Hall problem you are facing three doors: behind one door is something valuable, say a shiny red Maserati; behind the other two, an item of far less interest, say the complete works of Shakespeare in Serbian. You have chosen door 1. The sample space in this case is this list of three possible outcomes:

Maserati is behind door 1.

Maserati is behind door 2.

Maserati is behind door 3.

Each of these has a probability of 1 in 3. Since the assumption is that most people would prefer the Maserati, the first case is the winning case, and your chances of having guessed right are 1 in 3.

Now according to the problem, the next thing that happens is that the host, who knows what's behind all the doors, opens one you did not choose, revealing one of the sets of Shakespeare. In opening this door, the host has used what he knows to avoid revealing the Maserati, so this is not a completely random process. There are two cases to consider.

One is the case in which your initial choice was correct. Let's call that the Lucky Guess scenario. The host will now randomly open door 2 or door 3, and, if you choose to switch, instead of enjoying a fast, sexy ride, you'll be the owner of Troilus and Cressida in the Torlakian dialect. In the Lucky Guess scenario you are better off not switching — but the probability of landing in the Lucky Guess scenario is only 1 in 3.

The other case we must consider is that in which your initial choice was wrong. We'll call that the Wrong Guess scenario. The chances you guessed wrong are 2 out of 3, so the Wrong Guess scenario is twice as likely to occur as the Lucky Guess scenario. How does the Wrong Guess scenario differ from the Lucky Guess scenario? In the Wrong Guess scenario the Maserati is behind one of the doors you did not choose, and a copy of the Serbian Shakespeare is behind the other unchosen door. Unlike the Lucky Guess scenario, in this scenario the host does not randomly open an unchosen door. Since he does not want to reveal the Maserati, he chooses to open precisely the door that does not have the Maserati behind it. In other words, in the Wrong Guess scenario the host intervenes in what until now has been a random process. So the process is no longer random: the host uses his knowledge to bias the result, violating randomness by guaranteeing that if you switch your choice, you will get the fancy red car. Because of this intervention, if you find yourself in the Wrong Guess scenario, you will win if you switch and lose if you don't.

To summarize: if you are in the Lucky Guess scenario (probability 1 in 3), you'll win if you stick with your choice. If you are in the Wrong Guess scenario (probability 2 in 3), owing to the actions of the host, you will win if you switch your choice. And so your decision comes down to a guess: in which scenario do you find yourself? If you feel that ESP or fate has guided your initial choice, maybe you shouldn't switch. But unless you can bend silver spoons into pretzels with your brain waves, the odds are 2 to 1 that you are in the Wrong Guess scenario, and so it is better to switch. Statistics from the television program bear this out: those who found themselves in the situation described in the problem and switched their choice won about twice as often as those who did not.

The Monty Hall problem is hard to grasp because unless you think about it carefully, the role of the host, like that of your mother, goes unappreciated. But the host is fixing the game. The host's role can be made obvious if we suppose that instead of 3 doors, there were 100. You still choose door 1, but now you have a probability of 1 in 100 of being right. Meanwhile the chance of the Maserati's being behind one of the other doors is 99 in 100. As before, the host opens all but one of the doors that you did not pick, being sure not to open the door hiding the Maserati if it is one of them. After he is done, the chances are still 1 in 100 that the Maserati was behind the door you chose and still 99 in 100 that it was behind one of the other doors. But now, thanks to the intervention of the host, there is only one door left representing all 99 of those other doors, and so the probability that the Maserati is behind that remaining door is 99 out of 100!

Had the Monty Hall problem been around in Cardano's day, would he have been a Marilyn vos Savant or a Paul Erdös? The law of the sample space handles the problem nicely, but we have no way of knowing for sure, for the earliest known statement of the problem (under a different name) didn't occur until 1959, in an article by Martin Gardner in Scientific American.16 Gardner called it「a wonderfully confusing little problem」and noted that「in no other branch of mathematics is it so easy for experts to blunder as in probability theory.」Of course, to a mathematician a blunder is an issue of embarrassment, but to a gambler it is an issue of livelihood. And so it is fitting that when it came to the first systematic theory of probability, it took Cardano, the gambler, to figure things out.

ONE DAY while Cardano was in his teens, one of his friends died suddenly. After a few months, Cardano noticed, his friend's name was no longer mentioned by anyone. This saddened him and left a deep impression. How does one overcome the fact that life is transitory? He decided that the only way was to leave something behind — heirs or lasting works of some kind or both. In his autobiography, Cardano describes developing「an unshakable ambition」to leave his mark on the world.17

After obtaining his medical degree, Cardano returned to Milan, seeking employment. While in college he had written a paper,「On the Differing Opinions of Physicians,」that essentially called the medical establishment a bunch of quacks. The Milan College of Physicians now returned the favor, refusing to admit him. That meant he could not practice in Milan. And so, using money he had saved from his tutoring and gambling, Cardano bought a tiny house to the east, in the town of Piove di Sacco. He expected to do good business there because disease was rife in the town and it had no physician. But his market research had a fatal flaw: the town had no doctor because the populace preferred to be treated by sorcerers and priests. After years of intense work and study, Cardano found himself with little income but a lot of spare time on his hands. It proved a lucky break, for he seized the opportunity and began to write books. One of them was The Book on Games of Chance.

In 1532, after five years in Sacco, Cardano moved back to Milan, hoping to have his work published and once again applying for membership in the College of Physicians. On both fronts he was roundly rejected.「In those days,」he wrote,「I was sickened so to the heart that I would visit diviners and wizards so that some solution might be found to my manifold troubles.」18 One wizard suggested he shield himself from moon rays. Another that, on waking, he sneeze three times and knock on wood. Cardano followed all their prescriptions, but none changed his bad fortune. And so, hooded, he took to sneaking from building to building at night, surreptitiously treating patients who either couldn't afford the fees of sanctioned doctors or else didn't improve in their care. To supplement the income he earned from that endeavor, he wrote in his autobiography, he was「forced to the dice again so that I could support my wife; and here my knowledge defeated fortune, and we were able to buy food and live, though our lodgings were desolate.」19 As for The Book on Games of Chance, though he would revise and improve the manuscript repeatedly in the years to come, he never again sought to have it published, perhaps because he realized it wasn't a good idea to teach anyone to gamble as well as he could.

Cardano eventually achieved his goals in life, obtaining both heirs and fame — and a good deal of fortune to boot. The fortune began to accrue when he published a book based on his old college paper, altering the title from the somewhat academic「On the Differing Opinions of Physicians」to the zinger On the Bad Practice of Medicine in Common Use. The book was a hit. And then, when one of his secret patients, a well-known prior of the Augustinian order of friars, suddenly (and in all likelihood by chance) improved and attributed his recovery to Cardano's care, Cardano's fame as a physician took off on an upward spiral that reached such heights the College of Physicians felt compelled not only to grant him membership but also to make him its rector. Meanwhile he was publishing more books, and they did well, especially one for the general public called The Practice of Arithmetic. A few years later he published a more technical book, called the Ars magna, or The Great Art, a treatise on algebra in which he gave the first clear picture of negative numbers and a famous analysis of certain algebraic equations. When he reached his early fifties, in the mid-1550s, Cardano was at his peak, chairman of medicine at the University of Pavia and a wealthy man.

His good fortune didn't last. To a large extent what brought Cardano down was the other part of his legacy — his children. When she was sixteen, his daughter Chiara (named after his mother) seduced his older son, Giovanni, and become pregnant. She had a successful abortion, but it left her infertile. That suited her just fine, for she was boldly promiscuous, even after her marriage, and contracted syphilis. Giovanni went on to become a doctor but was soon more famous as a petty criminal, so famous he was blackmailed into marriage by a family of gold diggers who had proof that he had murdered, by poison, a minor city official. Meanwhile Aldo, Cardano's younger son who as a child had engaged in the torture of animals, turned that passion into work as a freelance torturer for the Inquisition. And like Giovanni, he moonlighted as a crook.

A few years after his marriage Giovanni gave one of his servants a mysterious mixture to incorporate into a cake for Giovanni's wife. When she keeled over after enjoying her dessert, the authorities put two and two together. Despite Gerolamo's spending a fortune on lawyers, his attempts to pull strings, and his testimony on his son's behalf, young Giovanni was executed in prison a short while later. The drain on Cardano's funds and reputation made him vulnerable to his old enemies. The senate in Milan expunged his name from the list of those allowed to lecture, and accusing him of sodomy and incest, had him exiled from the province. When Cardano left Milan at the end of 1563, he wrote in his autobiography, he was「reduced once more to rags, my fortune gone, my income ceased, my rents withheld, my books impounded.」20 By that time his mind was going too, and he was given to periods of incoherence. As the final blow, a self-taught mathematician named Niccolò Tartaglia, angry because in Ars magna Cardano had revealed Tartaglia's secret method of solving certain equations, coaxed Aldo into giving evidence against his father in exchange for an official appointment as public torturer and executioner for the city of Bologna. Cardano was jailed briefly, then quietly lived out his last few years in Rome. The Book on Games of Chance was finally published in 1663, over 100 years after young Cardano had first put the words to paper. By then his methods of analysis had been reproduced and surpassed.

### Notes

1 Alan Wykes, Doctor Cardano: Physician Extraordinary (London: Frederick Muller, 1969). See also Oystein Ore, Cardano: The Gambling Scholar, with a translation of Cardano's Book on Games of Chance by Sydney Henry Gould (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1953).

2 Marilyn vos Savant,「Ask Marilyn,」Parade, September 9, 1990.

3 Bruce D. Burns and Mareike Wieth,「Causality and Reasoning: The Monty Hall Dilemma,」in Proceedings of the Twenty-fifth Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, ed. R. Alterman and D. Kirsh (Hillsdale, N.J.: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 2003), p. 198.

4 National Science Board, Science and Engineering Indicators — 2002 (Arlington, Va.: National Science Foundation, 2002); http://www.nsf.gov/statistics/seind02/. See vol. 2, chap. 7, table 7-10.

5 Gary P. Posner,「Nation's Mathematicians Guilty of Innumeracy,」Skeptical Inquirer 15, no. 4 (Summer 1991).

6 Bruce Schechter, My Brain Is Open: The Mathematical Journeys of Paul Erdös (New York: Touchstone, 1998), pp. 107–9.

7 Ibid., pp. 189–90, 196–97.

8 John Tierney,「Behind Monty's Doors: Puzzle, Debate and Answer?」New York Times, July 21, 1991.

9 Robert S. Gottfried, The Black Death: Natural and Human Disaster in Medieval Europe (New York: Free Press, 1985).

10 Gerolamo Cardano, quoted in Wykes, Doctor Cardano, p. 18.

11 Kline, Mathematical Thought, pp. 184–85, 259–60.

12.「Oprah's New Shape: How She Got It,」O, the Oprah Magazine, January 2003.

13 Lorraine J. Daston, Classical Probability in the Enlightenment (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1998), p. 97.

14 Marilyn vos Savant,「Ask Marilyn,」Parade, March 3, 1996, p. 14.

15 There are four tires on the car, so, letting RF signify「right front,」and so on, there are 16 possible combinations of responses by the two students. If the first response listed represents that of student 1 and the second that of student 2, the possible joint responses are (RF, RF), (RF, LF), (RF, RR), (RF, LR), (LF, RF), (LF, LF), (LF, RR), (LF, LR), (RR, RF), (RR, LF), (RR, RR), (RR, LR), (LR, RF), (LR, LF), (LR, RR), (LR, LR). Of these 16, 4 are in agreement: (RF, RF), (LF, LF), (RR, RR), (LR, LR). Hence the chances are 4 out of 16, or 1 in 4.

16 Martin Gardner,「Mathematical Games,」Scientific American, October 1959, pp. 180–82.

17 Jerome Cardan, The Book of My Life: De Vita Propia Liber, trans. Jean Stoner (Whitefish, Mont.: Kessinger, 2004), p. 35.

18 Cardano, quoted in Wykes, Doctor Cardano, p. 57.

19 Cardano, quoted ibid.

20 Cardano, quoted ibid., p. 172.

0301寻找穿越可能性空间之路

1576 年之前的几年中，人们常常能看到一名着装古怪的老人，他迈着怪异而不规则的步伐，在罗马的大街上游荡，还不时发出几声既不针对特定听众也根本没人听的喊声。作为著名星相师、宫廷贵族的医师、帕维亚大学医学院主席，这个人曾一度被整个欧洲称颂。他有了许多不朽的发明，其中包括组合锁以及如今用于汽车的万能接头的前身。他发表了 131 篇论文，涉及哲学、医学、数学和科学等广泛领域。但在 1576 年，他不过是一个只有过去没有将来的人，一个生活在阴暗和无望的贫困之中的人。这一年夏末，他坐在桌前，写下了最后的话语 —— 为他那 16 年前仅 26 岁就被处死的长子也是他最钟爱的儿子所写的一首颂诗。老人死于 9 月 20 日，离他 75 岁生日只差几天。他三个孩子中的两个都先他而去，而去世时他那唯一健在的儿子，是一名受雇于宗教裁判所的职业拷问者，而这份优差，正是他提供不利于父亲的证据所得的赏赐。

吉罗拉莫·卡尔达诺死前焚烧了 170 份尚未发表的文稿。清理遗物的人发现其中未被烧毁的 111 份，其中有一份包含 32 个短小章节的论文。论文写成于他去世的数十年前，看来还常常被修改。论文名为《机遇博弈》（ The Book on Games of Chance ），它是历史上第一部关于随机性理论的著作。到卡尔达诺生活的时代为止，人们已经在赌博或处理其他不确定性的问题上实践了数千年：我能在渴死之前穿越这片沙漠吗？当大地像现在这样震动的时候，仍然待在山崖下面是不是很危险？那个喜欢在岩石上画水牛的穴居人女孩对我露齿一笑，是不是表示她喜欢我？但直到卡尔达诺之前，还没有人对赌博或其他不确定过程进行过详尽的分析。卡尔达诺对于随机性作用机制的洞察，形成了被称为样本空间定律的原理。样本空间定律是一种新的思想和新的方法论，并成为后世对不确定性进行数学描述的基础。这个方法十分简单：想想我们是怎样让账簿上的收支保持平衡的？将同样的思路写成随机性理论中定律的形式，这就是样本空间定律。方法虽然简单，却能让我们以系统化的方式解决诸多问题，如果没有这个新方法的帮助，那么这些问题可能会让我们陷入绝望的困惑。为了说明这条定律的应用及其威力，让我们考虑一个描述十分简单的问题。解决这个问题并不需要具有高等数学知识，但它难倒的人，却很可能比随机理论历史上的其他任何问题都多。

作为期刊专栏，《大观》杂志的《玛丽莲答客问》是一个公认的成功专栏。它被刊登在 350 份报纸上，并有着引以为豪的近 3600 万份的发行量，这个始于 1986 年的问答专栏至今仍然充满活力。专栏中的问题本身可能与答案一样富有启发性，而这个专栏也可以被视作一个（不那么科学的）调查美国人脑子里在想些什么东西的盖洛普民意测验。例如下面这些问题：

当股票市场在交易日停盘时，为什么每个人都围成一圈站着，还一边微笑一边鼓掌，而不管今天的股票是涨还是跌？

一位朋友怀了对儿异卵双胞胎。双胞胎中至少有一个是女孩的概率是多少？

当你在路上开车经过一只死黄鼠狼时，为什么过了 10 秒钟你才闻到那股臭味？假设你并没有轧过它。

显然，美国人都很现实。需要注意的是，每个问题都涉及一定的科学或数学知识，这也是许多在该专栏得到答复的问题的一个共同特征。

可能有人 —— 特别是对数学和科学知道那么一点儿的人 —— 会问：「谁是这个当家的玛丽莲？」呃…… 玛丽莲就是玛丽莲·莎凡特，她因为多年来占据着《吉尼斯世界纪录保持者：名人堂》的世界最高智商（228）宝座而声名远扬，也因为她嫁给了罗伯特·贾维克 —— 人造心脏的发明者 —— 而广为人知。但不管名人们的成就如何，他们被人们牢记的原因，有时却是一些他们希望从未发生过的事情（比如「我没有和那个女人发生过性关系」）。玛丽莲的情况也大体如此。最让她出名的，就是她对于下面这个问题的回答，这个问题出现在 1990 年 9 月某个周日的专栏中（我稍微改动了问题中的一些措辞）：

假设有一个游戏，游戏者可以在三扇门中做出选择：有一扇门后是一辆汽车，另两扇门后则是山羊。当游戏者选定某一扇门后，游戏的庄家（他知道各扇门后面是什么东西）将打开另外两扇门之一，门后是一只山羊。然后他问游戏者：「你想不想改变你的选择，选另外那扇没打开的门？」请问，如果游戏者的确改变了选择，这个改变对他是否有利？

这个问题的提出，受到电视游戏节目《让我们做笔交易》（ Let's Make a Deal ）的启发。该节目播放于 1963 年至 1976 年，1980 年到 1991 年还曾改头换面播出过几次。节目最吸引人的，就是英俊和蔼的主持人蒙提·霍尔，以及他那身材惹火的助手、1957 年加利福尼亚州阿苏萨小姐卡萝尔·梅里尔。

对于节目创始人而言，近 27 个年头、4500 期节目留下的主要遗产，却是上面这个概率问题，这不能不说是一件令人吃惊的事情。玛丽莲的读者们对这个问题的热烈甚至是激烈的回应，让她和《让我们做笔交易》这档节目得以史上留名。毕竟，这个问题看起来挺傻的：还有两扇门可以选择 —— 打开对的那扇，你就赢了；打开另一扇，你就输了。因此，看来不言而喻的事实是，不管你改变或不改变选择，赢的机会总是 50 比 50。还有比这更简单的吗？问题在于，玛丽莲在专栏中说，改变选择的赢面更大。

尽管公众对数学问题向来表现出意料之中的死气沉沉，但这一次，玛丽莲的读者们的反应，就如同她是在鼓吹放弃加利福尼亚州并将其交给墨西哥一样激烈。她对一个如此显而易见的事实的否定，带来了雪崩一样的邮件 —— 她估计，这些信件可能有 1 万封之多。而当我们问美国人植物是否产生了空气中的氧气，或者光是否比声音传播得更快，或者把带放射性的牛奶煮沸是否无法令其变得更安全等问题时，回答「否」的比例都达到两位数（分别为 13%、24% 和 35%）。但在玛丽莲这事儿上，美国人团结起来：92% 的人认为玛丽莲错了。

许多读者看起来非常失望：这样一个他们在各类问题上都如此信任有加的人，怎么会在这样一个简单问题上翻了船呢？她的错误是不是美国人那令人哀叹的无知的象征之一？近 1000 名博士 —— 包括许多数学教授，他们似乎对这个错误特别生气 —— 给玛丽莲写了信。「你错得离谱。」一位乔治梅森大学的数学家写道，

让我来解释一下吧，如果一扇失败的门被打开了，那么这个信息将使剩余两个选择各自的获胜概率变为 1/2，因为两者之中的任何一个都没有理由比另一个更可能获胜。作为一名职业数学家，我对于普通民众在数学技能上的匮乏感到忧心。希望您能够通过承认错误，为这种状况的改变尽一点儿力，并请在今后再细心一些。

从迪金森州立大学寄来的是这么一封信：「在至少三位数学家指出之后，您却依然没有认识到自己的错误，这使我震惊。」来自乔治敦大学的信则说：「到底要多少个愤怒的数学家才能使您改变想法？」美国陆军研究所的某博士如此评论：「如果所有这些博士都错了，这个国家就有大麻烦了。」各种反馈的数量如此之多，且持续时间如此之长，以至在这个问题上投入了颇多的栏目空间之后，玛丽莲决定不再讨论这个问题。

那位陆军研究所的博士说得大概没错：如果所有这些博士都错了，那么将是有大麻烦的信号。但玛丽莲确确实实是对的。20 世纪最杰出的数学家之一的保罗·厄多斯在得知此事后说：「这不可能。」甚至在看了正确答案的正式数学证明之后，他不但不相信，反而发火了。直到一名同事通过计算机仿真将这个游戏重复了数百次，并让厄多斯亲眼看到，改变选择相较于不改变选择，胜负之比为 2∶1，在这之后，厄多斯才勉强承认自己错了。

如此明显的一件事怎么可能错呢？按哈佛大学一位概率统计专业教授的话来说，原因在于「我们大脑的构造天生就不能很好地处理概率问题」。伟大的美国物理学家理查德·费曼曾告诉我说，如果只是将别人的推导看了又看，就永远别想理解任何物理学问题。他说，真正理解一个理论的唯一途径，就是自己去完成它的推导（或者可能最后证明它是错的！）。对于我们这些不是费曼的人而言，重新证明他人的工作，是个让自己丢掉在大学里的饭碗并在家得宝的收银员岗位上实践数学技能的好方法。但蒙提·霍尔问题并不需要任何专业数学知识就能解答。你不需要了解微积分、几何、代数甚至苯丙胺 —— 据称厄多斯就很喜欢使用这种兴奋剂。（传说厄多斯在戒了一个月之后说道：「我以前看着一张白纸时，脑子里满是各种各样的点子；现在我看着一张白纸时，那就真的只是一张白纸。」）你所需要的，不过是对概率的运作方式以及样本空间定律的理解，而样本空间定律正是卡尔达诺在 16 世纪首先著之于文、用于分析随机性的理论框架。

卡尔达诺并不是试图打破 16 世纪欧洲的智识氛围的离经叛道者。对他而言，犬吠意味着爱人的死亡，屋顶上几只乌鸦的嘎嘎叫声则意味着一场严重疾病的到来。他跟其他人一样相信命运、运气，也会根据行星和恒星的排列预测未来。尽管如此，如果他也玩扑克，那么他可不会把运气赌在缺了中间一张牌的顺子上。赌博是卡尔达诺的第二天性，他对赌博的感觉并非源于头脑，而是深入骨髓。因此，他对于各种可能发生的随机结果间数学关系的理解，凌驾于「这种理解根本就注定无用」之类的宿命论调之上。卡尔达诺的工作也超越了当时粗糙的数学，因为在 16 世纪早期，代数乃至算术都还处在石器时代，甚至连等号都还没有被发明出来。

根据卡尔达诺的自传以及同时代人的记述，他值得历史的大书特书。尽管有些文献内容相互矛盾，但有一件事可以肯定：生于 1501 年的卡尔达诺，并不是一个值得在他身上进行投资的孩子。尽管 —— 或者说因为 —— 他的母亲基娅拉已经有 3 个儿子了，她却不喜欢小孩子。又矮又壮、脾气火爆且男女关系混乱的基娅拉怀上卡尔达诺后，就自制了一剂 16 世纪的事后避孕药 —— 由苦艾、烧过的大麦粒和柽柳根酿成的酒。她喝下了这碗药酒，希望能将胎儿打掉。药酒虽然令她恶心无比，未出世的卡尔达诺对之却泰然处之，而且显然他对这碗药在母亲血液中留下的代谢产物十分满意。基娅拉其他的尝试也都以差不多的方式宣告失败了。

基娅拉与卡尔达诺的父亲费吉奥·卡尔达诺并没有结婚，但他们经常表现得有如正式夫妻 —— 他们的高声对骂可是相当出名的。在卡尔达诺出生前一个月，基娅拉离开了米兰的家，搬到南边 20 英里的帕维亚与她妹妹同住。在 3 天痛苦吃力的分娩之后，卡尔达诺终于冒出了头。看到这孩子的第一眼基娅拉肯定以为，她总算摆脱这个臭小子了。他看上去十分虚弱，更糟糕的是，他一不哭二不闹，就那么静静地躺着。产婆预言他活不过出生后的一个小时。但如果基娅拉确实曾梦想过「美好解脱」的话，那么她又得失望了：婴儿的乳母用温酒给他泡了个澡，然后，卡尔达诺复活了。不过他良好的健康状况只维持了几个月，就与乳母和三个同母异父的兄弟在大瘟疫中病倒了。黑死病 —— 这场瘟疫的另一个称呼 —— 实际上是三种不同的疾病：腺鼠疫、肺鼠疫和败血症型鼠疫。卡尔达诺患上的是三者中最常见的腺鼠疫，其典型症状之一就是令人痛苦难当、鸡蛋大小的腹股沟淋巴结肿块，这也是该病名称的由来。一旦出现这样的肿块，患者的期望寿命就只有一周左右。

黑死病最初于 1347 年跟随着从东方返回的一支热那亚舰队，由西西里东北城市墨西拿的一个港口进入欧洲。舰队很快被隔离，所有船员都死在船上 —— 但老鼠活了下来，并一路小跑上了岸，身上还带着病菌以及传播病菌的跳蚤。接下来的瘟疫大暴发在两个月内夺去了该城一半人口的性命，并最终杀死了全欧洲 25-50% 的人口。后继的传染病一波波袭来，这使得欧洲人口在几个世纪中一直无法增长。1501 年可算不上什么好年头，因为当年的意大利也有瘟疫流行。卡尔达诺的乳母和兄弟们都死了，但这个走运的孩子活下来，而且没留下什么后遗症，除了破了相：他的鼻子、额头、脸颊以及下巴上都留下了瘤子。他注定要活将近 75 个年头，他拥有的是一条满是冲突的人生之路和饱受打骂的幼年时光。

卡尔达诺的父亲差不多算是个操作员。就职业上来说，他是位几何学家，而且曾是达·芬奇的密友。几何学家从来就不是个赚钱的职位，费吉奥也的确常为租金发愁，因此他做起了事务咨询的买卖，为豪门望族提供法律与医学方面的建议。费吉奥宣称他是米兰的某位戈弗雷多·卡斯蒂廖尼 —— 更为人所知的称呼则是教皇塞莱斯廷四世 —— 的兄弟的后人。得益于此，咨询买卖终于兴旺起来。卡尔达诺 5 岁时，他父亲领他入了行 —— 姑且这么说吧。实际上，他的父亲在他背上绑了个筐，装上沉甸甸的法律和医学书籍，然后拽着小男孩满城跑去跟主顾见面。卡尔达诺后来写道：「有时，当我们走在街上时，父亲会命令我站住，然后打开一本书，拿我的头当桌子，读上长长的几个段落。如果我因为筐子太重而摇晃，他就用鞋尖踢我，让我不要动来动去。」

1516 年，卡尔达诺下定决心，认为他最好的机遇在医学方面。他宣布要离开米兰的家，去帕维亚学习。费吉奥却希望他能学习法律，以便赚取 100 克朗的年薪。一场大吵之后，费吉奥的气顺了些，但问题没有得到解决：如果没有这笔年薪，卡尔达诺怎样才能维持在帕维亚的生活和学习呢？于是卡尔达诺开始为人占星，教小学生几何、炼金术和天文学，并将所挣的钱积攒起来。就在这时的某一天，他发现自己在赌博方面有天分，而这种天分赚钱的速度，比其他方法要快得多。

在卡尔达诺的时代，对任何一个有赌瘾的人来说，每座城市都是拉斯韦加斯。赌纸牌，赌骰子，赌西洋双陆棋，甚至赌国际象棋，到处都可以下注。卡尔达诺将这些赌博分为两类：一类需要策略或技巧，另一类则完全靠运气。在象棋这一类赌博中，卡尔达诺可能会面临被某个 16 世纪的鲍比·费歇尔击败的风险；但如果只是对那一双小小的立方体下注，他的机会就跟其他人一样多了。其实，在后面这一类赌博中，他比别人更有优势，因为与对手相比，他更了解不同局势下获胜可能的大小。于是，作为进入博弈世界的第一步，他玩起了那些纯靠运气的游戏。不久，他就为自己存下了 1000 克朗的教育基金 —— 这比父亲希望他得到的 10 年年薪还要多。1520 年，他在帕维亚注册成为一名学生，没过多长时间便开始了关于赌博理论的写作。

对于古希腊人和罗马人来说，很多东西都是用古希腊文字记述或表达的，而到了卡尔达诺生活的年代，他再去理解这些东西时，便拥有了额外的优势，因为这时印度人已经在把算术用作一种强有力的工具方面，迈出了最初的一大步。正是在这个时期，以 10 为单位的位值制记数法得到发展，并于公元 700 年前后成为标准方法。印度人还在分数算术上取得了巨大进展，而分数运算对于概率分析至关重要，因为事情发生的可能性总是比 1 小。印度人的这些知识被阿拉伯人采用，最终传入欧洲。最初的运算符号缩写 —— p 表示加法，m 表示减法 —— 于 15 世纪被使用，而 + 和 - 也在同一时期被德国人引入，只不过当时仅用来表示箱子超重或欠重。我们如果注意到当时连等号都还没有，大概就能在一定程度上认识到卡尔达诺所面临的挑战了。等号于 1557 年由工作于牛津大学和剑桥大学的罗伯特·雷科德发明。受到几何学的启发，他认为没有什么东西能比两条平行直线更为相似了，因此，这样的两条平行直线段应当被用来表示相等性。而归功于某位英国国教牧师的乘法符号「×」，则要到 17 世纪才会登上历史舞台。

《机遇博弈》涵盖了纸牌、骰子、西洋双陆棋和距骨等赌博游戏。该书并非尽善尽美，书中所反映的，是卡尔达诺的性格、各种疯狂的念头、狂野的脾气、他做任何事情时怀有的激情，以及他的生命和时代中的动荡不安。在某些问题上，卡尔达诺还犯了错。但《机遇博弈》仍然是概率论这个登陆场上的桥头堡，是人类在探索不确定性本质的过程中取得的首次成功。而卡尔达诺用来解决偶然性问题的方法，因其威力和简单而令人惊讶。

这本书并不是每个章节都在谈论技术问题。如第 26 章的标题是「教得好也能玩得好吗？」（他最后的结论是，「知道一件事和实际去做，似乎完全是两码事」），第 29 章名为「论赌徒的性格」（「有些人的话实在太多了，让自己和别人都丧失了理智」），这些内容看起来更像《亲爱的艾比》而非《玛丽莲答客问》。但同样是在这本书中，卡尔达诺在第 14 章「论点数的组合」（论可能性）里，阐述了「一条普适的规则」，即样本空间定律。

「样本空间」一词的含义，是指一个随机过程中每种可能的结果，都可以被视为某空间中的一点。在简单的情形里，这个空间可能仅包含少量几个点；但在更复杂的情况下，它可能如我们所生活的空间那样，是一个连续统。但卡尔达诺并没有称其为「空间」：将数的集合称为空间的描述方式，还要再等一个世纪，到天才的笛卡儿发明了坐标，并统一了代数与几何之后才会出现。

卡尔达诺的规则用现代语言表述大致如下： 假设一个随机过程有若干等可能性结果，这些结果中有些好（即赢的结果），有些不好（输的结果）。那么，获得一个好结果的概率，就等于所有那些好结果在全体结果中所占的比例。而这个由所有可能结果构成的集合，被称为样本空间 。换言之，如果扔出一个骰子 6 个面中任一面的可能性是均等的，那么这 6 个可能出现的面就形成样本空间，而如果对其中两个面下注，获胜的概率就是 2/6。

我再多说一句，所有结果都以等可能性发生的这种假设，显然并非总是成立。如果我们对奥普拉·温弗瑞成年时的体重进行观测，那么可能观察到的体重所构成的样本空间（曾经）是 145 磅到 237 磅，但在我们的观测期间，并非所有的体重区间出现的可能性都相等。不同的可能结果具有不同的发生概率这一事实，使得问题变得更加复杂。不过我们可以通过细致的计算，为每个可能的结果赋予一个适当的概率，从而解决这一问题。不过让我们先来看几个例子，正如卡尔达诺分析的那些例子一样，在我们的例子中，每种结果的发生都具有等可能性。

卡尔达诺规则的有力之处，与某些细微精妙的方面密不可分，其中之一就是「结果」一词的含义。迟至 18 世纪，多部概率论著作的作者、法国著名数学家达朗贝尔在分析扔两枚硬币的问题时，都还错误地使用了这个概念。扔出两枚硬币，则正面朝上的硬币可能的数目为 0、1 或 2。然后，达朗贝尔推论说，既然有这样 3 种结果，那么每种结果出现的可能性就一定是 1/3。他错了。

卡尔达诺工作的一个最大不足，在于他没有系统地分析事件序列不同的可能发生方式，比如连续多次扔硬币所得的结果。下一章我们将会说明，这个工作要到他过世后的下一个世纪，才有人来完成。不过，扔两次硬币的问题足够简单，我们可以很容易把卡尔达诺的方法用上。这种方法的关键在于我们要认识到，所谓可能结果，应该是描述硬币两次掉落得到的正反面朝上情况的数据，而不是由这些数据计算得到的正面朝上的次数。换句话说，可能结果并不是 0、1 或 2 枚硬币正面朝上，而应该是可能出现的投掷结果序列（正，正）、（正，反）、（反，正）和（反，反）。构成样本空间的，便是这 4 种可能的结果。

按卡尔达诺所说，我们接下来应该列好这些结果，并记录每个结果中正面朝上的硬币数目。在这 4 种可能的结果中，只有（正，正）这一种结果能得到两枚正面朝上的硬币。与此类似，只有（反，反）这一种结果让我们两手空空。但有两种结果能给出有一枚正面朝上的情况：（正，反）和（反，正）。卡尔达诺的方法就在这里指出了达朗贝尔的错误之处：出现 0 枚或 2 枚硬币正面朝上的机会各为 25%，但出现 1 枚硬币正面朝上的机会为 50%。如果卡尔达诺以 3 赔 1 的赔率把赌注押在出现一次正面朝上的结果上，那么在一半的赌局中，他会输掉赌注，但在另一半的赌局中，却会赚到 3 倍于赌本的钱。对于一个正在为读大学而积攒学费的 16 世纪的小男孩来说，这个好机会可是了不得的 —— 哪怕在今天，如果找得到愿意出这个赔率的人，那么这也是个了不得的好机会。

一个经常出现在初等概率课程中的相关问题，就是所谓「两女儿问题」。它与我从《玛丽莲答客问》专栏引用的一个问题颇为相似。假设有位母亲怀上了一对儿双胞胎，现在她想知道两个都是女儿或一个儿子一个女儿等这些情况的概率。这个问题的样本空间，由两个孩子按出生先后顺序排列所得的性别列表构成：（女孩，女孩）、（女孩，男孩）、（男孩，女孩）以及（男孩，男孩）。这个样本空间与前面那个扔硬币问题的样本空间其实是一回事，只不过空间中点的命名方式有所不同：「正」变成了「女孩」，而「反」变成了「男孩」。数学家给这种不过是将某个问题换了个说法，变成另一个问题的情况起了个怪名字：同构性。两个问题同构常常意味着我们可以省去很多麻烦。在现在的例子中，同构性意味着两个孩子都是女孩的可能性，等于两枚硬币都是正面朝上的可能性。由此，我们甚至不需要进行任何分析，就能知道问题的答案是一样的：25%。现在，我们就能回答玛丽莲专栏里的那个问题了：两个孩子中至少有一个女孩的可能性，等于两个都是女孩的可能性，再加上两个孩子中仅有一个是女孩的可能性，也就是 25% 加 50% 等于 75%。

在两女儿问题中，常被进一步问及的是：如果两个孩子中有一个是女孩，那么两个孩子都是女孩的可能性是多少？大家可能会推理如下：既然已知一个孩子是女孩，那么只考虑剩下那个孩子的性别即可，而这个孩子是女孩的可能性是 50%，所以两个都是女孩的可能性，也就是 50%。

这个回答并不正确。为什么呢？尽管问题的描述中说有一个孩子是女孩，却并没有说是哪一个。这样一来，情况就有变化了。如果你对此感到糊涂，也请不用担心，这是很正常的，因为这个问题恰恰能展现卡尔达诺方法的威力 —— 它使得推理过程清晰而明了。

两个孩子中有一个是女孩的新信息，意味着我们可以把两个都是男孩的可能，从需要考虑的情况中去掉。因此，在运用卡尔达诺的方法时，我们将（男孩，男孩）这个结果从样本空间中剔除，而新的样本空间就只剩下三种结果：（女孩，男孩）、（男孩，女孩）和（女孩，女孩）。其中只有（女孩，女孩）（即两个孩子都是女儿）这个结果是我们所希望的，因此，两个都是女孩的可能性是 1/3，即 33%。下面我们来看看，不具体指明哪个孩子是女孩这一点，为什么是一个十分重要的因素？如果问题问的是：当第一个孩子是女孩时 ，两个都是女孩的可能性是多少，那么我们应该从样本空间中把（男孩，男孩）和（男孩，女孩）这两个可能都去掉，而所得的概率就是 1/2，即 50%。

我们应当信任玛丽莲，因为她不仅试图提高公众对于基本概率知识的理解，而且勇于继续发表相关的问题，哪怕是在经历了令人沮丧的蒙提·霍尔问题之后仍然如此。作为讨论的结束，我们再来看看她专栏中的另一个刊登于 1996 年 3 月的问题。

下面这个故事是我爸爸在广播里听到的。有两名杜克大学的学生，在整个学期里他们化学测验的成绩都是 A。但在期终考的头天晚上，他们跑到另一个州去参加派对，等返回学校时，考试已经结束。他们向教授解释说车胎没气了，并希望能补考。教授同意了。他出了一份卷子，然后将两人分别安排在两个教室里考试。第一道题（在试卷的一面上）是 5 分，而翻到另一面，则是 95 分的第二题：「哪个车胎没气了？」请问两名学生给出相同答案的可能性是多少？我爸爸和我都觉得是 1/16，对吗？

不，这个答案不对：如果两名学生在撒谎，那么他们碰巧选中相同答案的可能性正确值为 1/4（如果你需要一点儿帮助才能找到原因，那么请看本书后面的注释）。好了，现在我们已经熟悉了将问题分解为一系列可能情况的做法，接下来我们就可以运用样本空间定律来解决蒙提·霍尔问题了。

正如我们之前所说，要理解蒙提·霍尔问题，并不需要什么数学方面的专业训练，但的确需要一点儿细致的逻辑思维。因此，如果你在一边看《辛普森一家》的重播，一边读我们现在这段话，那么最好把其中一件稍微推后一些。不过有个好消息是，要理解我们的问题，只要几页纸就够了。

在蒙提·霍尔问题中，你面对着 3 扇门：其中一扇的后面是个值钱的物件，比如一辆崭新锃亮的红色玛莎拉蒂；而在另两扇门的后面，则是让人兴味索然的什么玩意儿，比如塞尔维亚语的《莎士比亚全集》。假设你选择了 1 号门。这时，样本空间由以下的 3 个可能结果构成：

玛莎拉蒂在 1 号门后。

玛莎拉蒂在 2 号门后。

玛莎拉蒂在 3 号门后。

每种可能的发生概率都是 1/3。我们假定大多数人都对玛莎拉蒂更感兴趣，因此第一种是获胜的结果，而你猜对的可能性为 1/3。

根据问题所说，接下来发生的，就是庄家 —— 他知道每扇门后面是什么东西 —— 打开了那两扇未被选中的门之一，门后是那两套《莎士比亚全集》中的一套。在打开这扇门时，庄家实际上已经根据他掌握的信息，避免打开停着玛莎拉蒂的那扇门。因此，这一行动并不是完全随机的过程。现在考虑两种情况。

第一种情况，你一开始就选对了。我们称这种情况为「走大运」。这时，庄家将随机打开 2 号门或 3 号门，而如果你在庄家开门后改变选择，那么你会成为托拉克（Torlakian）方言版《特洛伊罗斯与克瑞西达》的主人，而不是爽爽地飙一次车。在「走大运」的情况下，不更换选择的结局更好 —— 但「走大运」发生的概率只有 1/3。

另一种情况是你开始时选错了，我们称为「撞霉运」。你开始时选错的可能性是 2/3，因此，「撞霉运」的机会要比「走大运」的机会大上一倍。「撞霉运」与「走大运」相比有何不同呢？在「撞霉运」中，那辆玛莎拉蒂就藏在你没有选的那两扇门之一的后面，而另外一扇的后面则是塞尔维亚语的《莎士比亚全集》。与「走大运」不同，在「撞霉运」的情况下，庄家并非随机地打开一扇你没有选中的门。既然他不想让玛莎拉蒂暴露，所以他有选择性地打开正好没有玛莎拉蒂的那扇门。换句话说，在「撞霉运」中，庄家介入了迄今为止还是随机的游戏过程，而他的介入使得过程不再随机：庄家利用他所掌握的知识，使结果偏离了真正随机的结果，他确保你如果改变选择，就一定能得到那辆迷人的红色轿车，从而打破了游戏的随机性。正是由于庄家的介入，如果你知道自己「撞霉运」了，改变先前的选择就能获胜，否则就输了。

总而言之，如果开始时「走大运」（可能性为 1/3），那么不改变选择能获胜；如果开始时「撞霉运」（可能性为 2/3），那么由于庄家的举动，你可以通过改变选择获胜。因此，最后决策的关键在于如下的猜测：你开始时到底是碰到了哪种情况？如果你觉得是你的第六感或命运的指引让你做出最初的选择，或许就不该更改选择。但除非你能用脑电波把一把银勺子弯成椒盐卷饼，那么「撞霉运」和「走大运」两者的概率之比为 2 比 1，因此你最好还是改变主意，更换你的选择。电视节目的统计数据证实了这一论断：相较于不改变选择的人，那些改变选择的人获胜的次数差不多是前者的两倍。

要理解蒙提·霍尔问题很困难，因为不仔细思考的话，庄家所扮演的角色很容易被忽视，就如同你忽视母亲所做的一切那样。但庄家实际上将这个游戏修整得对游戏者更有利。为了使庄家扮演的角色更明显，我们假设现在游戏中不是 3 扇门，而是 100 扇门。你仍然选择其中一扇，但现在选对的可能性就只有 1/100，而玛莎拉蒂藏在剩下的某扇门后面的可能性是 99/100。跟之前一样，庄家将剩下的 99 扇门中的 98 扇都打开，并确保这些门后都不是玛莎拉蒂。现在，你就该感谢庄家的介入了，因为之前未被选中的 99 扇门，现在只剩下硕果仅存的一个代表，而玛莎拉蒂藏在这扇门后的可能性是 99/100！

如果蒙提·霍尔问题出现在卡尔达诺的时代，他会是玛丽莲还是厄多斯？样本空间定律很漂亮地解决了这个问题，我们却无法确知卡尔达诺到底会成为哪一个，因为该问题最早的（不同名字的）表述，出现在 1959 年马丁·加德纳发表在《科学美国人》杂志的一篇文章中。加德纳称它为「一个能把人搞糊涂的极好的小问题」，并指出「相较于数学领域中其他任何一个分支，概率理论最容易让专家犯下大错」。当然，对数学家而言，犯下这个错误是件很没面子的事情，不过对赌徒而言，这可不仅仅是面子的问题，而且是生计的问题。因此，由赌徒卡尔达诺搞出首个系统性的概率理论，倒是再合适不过了。

在卡尔达诺十来岁的时候，他的一位朋友在某天突然死去。几个月后，卡尔达诺注意到已经不再有人提起这位朋友的姓名。这件事令他很悲伤，也给他留下深刻的印象。生命不过是过眼云烟，谁能改变这个事实呢？在他看来，要改变这一点，就必须在身后留下些什么东西 —— 要么是继承人，要么是不朽的成就，或者两样都有。在自传中，卡尔达诺写下了他希望在世上留下印迹的「不可动摇的野心」。

获得医学学位后，卡尔达诺回到米兰找工作。他在大学时写了一篇《论医生之互不相同的观点》，在文中，他斩钉截铁地把当时的医学称为一堆骗人的东西。米兰医学院在他找工作时还了这份情：他们拒绝承认他的医学学历。这意味着他无法在米兰行医。因此，卡尔达诺用他剩下的靠教书和赌博攒下的积蓄，在米兰东边萨科河畔皮奥韦买了间小屋。当时镇上疾病肆虐，却没有医生，因此，他满心期望在那里做笔好买卖。不过他这次的市场调研有一个致命的缺陷：镇上之所以没有医生，是因为人们更愿意找巫师或牧师来治病。几年勤奋的工作学习下来，卡尔达诺发现他的收入几乎为零，而空闲时间倒是颇多。后来的事实证明，这段时间对他而言是一个幸运的休整期，因为他抓住这个机会开始著书立说，其中之一就是《机遇博弈》。

在萨科河畔待了 5 年后，卡尔达诺于 1532 年搬回米兰，希望在那里把书出版，并再次申请加入米兰医学院。又一次，他在这两条战线上遭遇了彻底的失败。「在那些日子里，」他写道，「我感到如此疲惫，甚至都会去找那些算卦和玩弄巫术的家伙，希望能为接二连三的麻烦找到一个解决之法。」一个巫师建议他把月光挡在屋外，另一个则建议他在起床时打三个喷嚏并敲打木头。卡尔达诺遵照了所有建议，但没有一种方法能改变他的霉运。因此他只好戴上头巾，半夜里鬼鬼祟祟地从一幢房子跑到另一幢房子，秘密医治那些负担不起执业医生的诊疗费，或者在他们的治疗下不见好转的病人。他在自传中还写道，为了弄一点儿额外的钱贴补这样辛苦得来的收入，他「被迫再次拿起骰子，以求养活我的妻子。在骰子上，我的知识战胜了运气，而我们也才能够买得起食物，继续生活，尽管我们租住的地方仍是家徒四壁」。至于《机遇博弈》，他在后来的岁月中不断进行审校修改，却再也没有尝试将它出版。这或许是因为他认识到，把每个人都教得跟自己一样善于赌博，可不是什么好主意。

卡尔达诺终于达成了他的人生目标：他有了继承人，也有了名声 —— 当然还有大笔的财富。他将大学时的论文《论医生之互不相同的观点》改头换面，把原来那个带着一股子学究气的标题，换成了铿锵有力的《论普通用药中的不良做法》，并成书出版。该书畅销一时，他的财富随之慢慢增长。后来，他的那些秘密病人之一，某知名奥古斯丁修会会长，病情突然（而且从各种可能性来看，都应该是碰巧）好转了。病人将痊愈的功劳都归于卡尔达诺的照料，卡尔达诺作为一名医生的名声因此扶摇直上，一飞冲天，以至米兰医学院不得不授予他学院成员的职位，并任命他为院长。与此同时，他出版了更多图书，销量都还不错，特别是为普通大众所写的《算术练习》（ The Practice of Arithmetic ）一书。数年后，他出版了一本技术性更强的书《大术》。这是一部代数论著，它首次清晰地描述了负数，并对若干代数方程进行了分析。在他 50 岁出头，即 16 世纪 50 年代中期时，卡尔达诺达到人生的巅峰，成为帕维亚大学医学院的教授，也成了一个有钱人。

不过他的好运没能持续多久。很大程度上，使卡尔达诺走下坡路的，正是他遗产的另一半 —— 他的孩子们。女儿基娅拉（以他母亲的名字命名）在 16 岁那年勾引了大儿子吉奥瓦尼并怀了孕。尽管成功流产，但她丧失了生育能力。对她来说，这倒没什么不好，因为她在私生活方面实在大胆，甚至在婚后也是如此。最终她感染了梅毒。吉奥瓦尼后来也当了医生，但很快就作为一名卑鄙的罪犯更加出名了。吉奥瓦尼因此不得不近似于被强迫地与一个采金者家庭联姻，因为这家人掌握了他用毒药谋害一名低级市政官员的证据。与此同时，从小就热衷于虐待动物的卡尔达诺的小儿子阿尔多，将这种热情倾注到一份差使上 —— 他成为一名自由职业者式的宗教裁判所拷问者。而且与吉奥瓦尼一样，他还是名兼职骗子。

结婚几年后的一天，吉奥瓦尼把一瓶神秘的混合物交给他的一名佣人，要他把这瓶东西混进给妻子做的蛋糕中。他妻子享用完这份甜点就倒下了。尽管卡尔达诺花了一大笔钱聘请律师，想方设法走后门，还为儿子提供了有利的证言，但当局把各种证据联系起来，仍然在不久之后将年轻的吉奥瓦尼在狱中处决了。耗尽了金钱与名誉的卡尔达诺在老对头的手下变得不堪一击。米兰元老院将他从演讲者名单中抹去，指责他犯下了鸡奸与乱伦的罪行，并将他逐出这个省份。当卡尔达诺在 1563 年年末离开米兰时 —— 他在自传中写道 —— 他「再次成为一个穷光蛋，财富消失了，收入没有了，租金被扣了，书也被没收了」。他的意识也在这时开始消失，对他而言，生活成了不连贯的片段。一个名叫尼科洛·塔尔塔利亚的自学成才的数学家给了他最后一击，因为他对卡尔达诺在《大术》一书中公开了他的某些解方程的绝招怒不可遏。他哄着阿尔多提供了不利于其父亲的证据，而作为交换，阿尔多得到了博洛尼亚城公共拷问者与行刑人的官方委任。卡尔达诺被短暂地关押了一段时间，然后静悄悄地在罗马度过了人生的最后几年。《机遇博弈》最终于 1663 年得以出版，此时距年轻的卡尔达诺在纸上写下这些文字已经过去了 100 多年，而且其他人已经重新发现并超越了他的分析方法。

## 0401. Tracking the Pathways to Success

IF A GAMBLER of Cardano's day had understood Cardano's mathematical work on chance, he could have made a tidy profit betting against less sophisticated players. Today, with what he had to offer, Cardano could have achieved both fame and fortune writing books like The Idiot's Guide to Casting Dice with Suckers. But in his own time, Cardano's work made no big splash, and his Book on Games of Chance remained unpublished until long after his death. Why did Cardano's work have so little impact? As we've said, one hindrance to those who preceded him was the lack of a good system of algebraic notation. That system in Cardano's day was improving but was still in its infancy. Another roadblock, however, had yet to be removed: Cardano worked at a time when mystical incantation was more valued than mathematical calculation. If people did not look for the order in nature and did not develop numerical descriptions of events, then a theory of the effect of randomness on those events was bound to go unappreciated. As it turned out, had Cardano lived just a few decades later, both his work and its reception might have been far different, for the decades after his death saw the unfolding of historic changes in European thought and belief, a transformation that has traditionally been dubbed the scientific revolution.

The scientific revolution was a revolt against a way of thinking that was prevalent as Europe emerged from the Middle Ages, an era in which people's beliefs about the way the world worked were not scrutinized in any systematic manner. Merchants in one town stole the clothes off a hanged man because they believed it would help their sales of beer. Parishioners in another believed illness could be cured by chanting sacrilegious prayers as they marched naked around their church altar.1 One trader even believed that relieving himself in the「wrong」toilet would bring bad fortune. Actually he was a bond trader who confessed his secret to a CNN reporter in 2003.2 Yes, some people still adhere to superstitions today, but at least today, for those who are interested, we have the intellectual tools to prove or disprove the efficacy of such actions. But if Cardano's contemporaries, say, won at dice, rather than analyzing their experience mathematically, they would say a prayer of thanks or refuse to wash their lucky socks. Cardano himself believed that streaks of losses occur because「fortune is averse」and that one way to improve your results is to give the dice a good hard throw. If a lucky 7 is all in the wrist, why stoop to mathematics?

The moment that is often considered the turning point for the scientific revolution came in 1583, just seven years after Cardano's death. That is when a young student at the University of Pisa sat in a cathedral and, according to legend, rather than listening to the services, stared at something he found far more intriguing: the swinging of a large hanging lamp. Using his pulse as a timer, Galileo Galilei noticed that the lamp seemed to take the same amount of time to swing through a wide arc as it did to swing through a narrow one. That observation suggested to him a law: the time required by a pendulum to perform a swing is independent of the amplitude of the swing. Galileo's was a precise and practical observation, and although simple, it signified a new approach to the description of physical phenomena: the idea that science must focus on experience and experimentation — how nature operates — rather than on what intuition dictates or our minds find appealing. And most of all, it must be done with mathematics.

Galileo employed his scientific skills to write a short piece on gambling,「Thoughts about Dice Games.」The work was produced at the behest of his patron, the grand duke of Tuscany. The problem that bothered the grand duke was this: when you throw three dice, why does the number 10 appear more frequently than the number 9? The excess of 10s is only about 8 percent, and neither 10 nor 9 comes up very often, so the fact that the grand duke played enough to notice the small difference means he probably needed a good twelve-step program more than he needed Galileo. For whatever reason, Galileo was not keen to work on the problem and grumbled about it. But like any consultant who wants to stay employed, he kept his grumbling low-key and did his job.

If you throw a single die, the chances of any number in particular coming up are 1 in 6. But if you throw two dice, the chances of different totals are no longer equal. For example, there is a 1 in 36 chance of the dice totaling 2 but twice that chance of their totaling 3. The reason is that a total of 2 can be obtained in only 1 way, by tossing two 1s, but a total of 3 can be obtained in 2 ways, by tossing a 1 and then a 2 or a 2 and then a 1. That brings us to the next big step in understanding random processes, which is the subject of this chapter: the development of systematic methods for analyzing the number of ways in which events can happen.

THE KEY TO UNDERSTANDING the grand duke's confusion is to approach the problem as if you were a Talmudic scholar: rather than attempting to explain why 10 comes up more frequently than 9, we ask, why shouldn't 10 come up more frequently than 9? It turns out there is a tempting reason to believe that the dice should sum to 10 and 9 with equal frequency: both 10 and 9 can be constructed in 6 ways from the throw of three dice. For 9 we can write those ways as (621), (531), (522), (441), (432), and (333). For 10 they are (631), (622), (541), (532), (442), and (433). According to Cardano's law of the sample space, the probability of obtaining a favorable outcome is equal to the proportion of outcomes that are favorable. A sum of 9 and 10 can be constructed in the same number of ways. So why is one more probable than the other?

The reason is that, as I've said, the law of the sample space in its original form applies only to outcomes that are equally probable, and the combinations listed above are not. For instance, the outcome (631) — that is, throwing a 6, a 3, and a 1 — is 6 times more likely than the outcome (333) because although there is only 1 way you can throw three 3s, there are 6 ways you can throw a 6, a 3, and a 1: you can throw a 6 first, then a 3, and then a 1, or you can throw a 1 first, then a 3, then a 6, and so on. Let's represent an outcome in which we are keeping track of the order of throws by a triplet of numbers separated by commas. Then the short way of saying what we just said is that the outcome (631) consists of the possibilities (1,3,6), (1,6,3), (3,1,6), (3,6,1), (6,1,3), and (6,3,1), whereas the outcome (333) consists only of (3,3,3). Once we've made this decomposition, we can see that the outcomes are equally probable and we can apply the law. Since there are 27 ways of rolling a 10 with three dice but only 25 ways to get a total of 9, Galileo concluded that with three dice, rolling a 10 was 27/25, or about 1.08, times more likely.

In solving the problem, Galileo implicitly employed our next important principle: The chances of an event depend on the number of ways in which it can occur. That is not a surprising statement. The surprise is just how large that effect is — and how difficult it can be to calculate. For example, suppose you give a 10-question true-or-false quiz to your class of 25 sixth-graders. Let's do an accounting of the results a particular student might achieve: she could answer all questions correctly; she could miss 1 question — that can happen in 10 ways because there are 10 questions she could miss; she could miss a pair of questions — that can happen in 45 ways because there are 45 distinct pairs of questions; and so on. As a result, on average in a collection of students who are randomly guessing, for every student scoring 100 percent, you'll find about 10 scoring 90 percent and 45 scoring 80 percent. The chances of getting a grade near 50 percent are of course higher still, but in a class of 25 the probability that at least one student will get a B (80 percent) or better if all the students are guessing is about 75 percent. So if you are a veteran teacher, it is likely that among all the students over the years who have shown up unprepared and more or less guessed at your quizzes, some were rewarded with an A or a B.

A few years ago Canadian lottery officials learned the importance of careful counting the hard way when they decided to give back some unclaimed prize money that had accumulated.3 They purchased 500 automobiles as bonus prizes and programmed a computer to determine the winners by randomly selecting 500 numbers from their list of 2.4 million subscriber numbers. The officials published the unsorted list of 500 winning numbers, promising an automobile for each number listed. To their embarrassment, one individual claimed (rightly) that he had won two cars. The officials were flabbergasted — with over 2 million numbers to choose from, how could the computer have randomly chosen the same number twice? Was there a fault in their program?

The counting problem the lottery officials ran into is equivalent to a problem called the birthday problem: how many people must a group contain in order for there to be a better than even chance that two members of the group will share the same birthday (assuming all birth dates are equally probable)? Most people think the answer is half the number of days in a year, or about 183. But that is the correct answer to a different question: how many people do you need to have at a party for there to be a better than even chance that one of them will share your birthday? If there is no restriction on which two people will share a birthday, the fact that there are many possible pairs of individuals who might have shared birthdays changes the answer drastically. In fact, the answer is astonishingly low: just 23. When pulling from a pool of 2.4 million, as in the case of the Canadian lottery, it takes many more than 500 numbers to have an even chance of a repeat. But still that possibility should not have been ignored. The chances of a match come out, in fact, to about 5 percent. Not huge, but it could have been accounted for by having the computer cross each number off the list as it was chosen. For the record, the Canadian lottery requested the lucky fellow to forgo the second car, but he refused.

Another lottery mystery that raised many eyebrows occurred in Germany on June 21, 1995.4 The freak event happened in a lottery called Lotto 6/49, which means that the winning six numbers are drawn from the numbers 1 to 49. On the day in question the winning numbers were 15-25-27-30-42-48. The very same sequence had been drawn previously, on December 20, 1986. It was the first time in 3,016 drawings that a winning sequence had been repeated. What were the chances of that? Not as bad as you'd think. When you do the math, the chance of a repeat at some point over the years comes out to around 28 percent.

Since in a random process the number of ways in which an outcome can occur is a key to determining how probable it is, the key question is, how do you calculate the number of ways in which something can occur? Galileo seems to have missed the significance of that question. He did not carry his work on randomness beyond that problem of dice and said in the first paragraph of his work that he was writing about dice only because he had been「ordered」to do so.5 In 1633, as his reward for promoting a new approach to science, Galileo was condemned by the Inquisition. But science and theology had parted ways for good; scientists now analyzing how? were unburdened by the theologians' issue of why? Soon a scholar from a new generation, schooled since his youth on Galileo's philosophy of science, would take the analysis of contingency counting to new heights, reaching a level of understanding without which most of today's science could not be conducted.

WITH THE BLOSSOMING of the scientific revolution the frontiers of randomness moved from Italy to France, where a new breed of scientist, rebelling against Aristotle and following Galileo, developed it further and deeper than had either Cardano or Galileo. This time the importance of the new work would be recognized, and it would make waves all over Europe. Though the new ideas would again be developed in the context of gambling, the first of this new breed was more a mathematician turned gambler than, like Cardano, a gambler turned mathematician. His name was Blaise Pascal.

Pascal was born in June 1623 in Clermont-Ferrand, a little more than 250 miles south of Paris. Realizing his son's brilliance, and having moved to Paris, Blaise's father introduced him at age thirteen to a newly founded discussion group there that insiders called the Académie Mersenne after the black-robed friar who had founded it. Mersenne's society included the famed philosopher-mathematician René Descartes and the amateur mathematics genius Pierre de Fermat. The strange mix of brilliant thinkers and large egos, with Mersenne present to stir the pot, must have had a great influence on the teenage Blaise, who developed personal ties to both Fermat and Descartes and picked up a deep grounding in the new scientific method.「Let all the disciples of Aristotle…,」he would write,「recognize that experiment is the true master who must be followed in Physics.」6

But how did a bookish and stodgy fellow of pious beliefs become involved with issues of the urban gambling scene? On and off Pascal experienced stomach pains, had difficulty swallowing and keeping food down, and suffered from debilitating weakness, severe headaches, bouts of sweating, and partial paralysis of the legs. He stoically followed the advice of his physicians, which involved bleedings, purgings, and the consumption of asses' milk and other「disgusting」potions that he could barely keep from vomiting — a「veritable torture,」according to his sister Gilberte.7 Pascal had by then left Paris, but in the summer of 1647, aged twenty-four and growing desperate, he moved back with his sister Jacqueline in search of better medical care. There his new bevy of doctors offered the state-of-the-art advice that Pascal「ought to give up all continued mental labor, and should seek as much as possible all opportunities to divert himself.」8 And so Pascal taught himself to kick back and relax and began to spend time in the company of other young men of leisure. Then, in 1651, Blaise's father died, and suddenly Pascal was a twenty-something with an inheritance. He put the cash to good use, at least in the sense of his doctors' orders. Biographers call the years from 1651 to 1654 Pascal's「worldly period.」His sister Gilberte called it「the time of his life that was worst employed.」9 Though he put some effort into self-promotion, his scientific research went almost nowhere, but for the record, his health was the best it had ever been.

Often in history the study of the random has been aided by an event that was itself random. Pascal's work represents such an occasion, for it was his abandonment of study that led him to the study of chance. It all began when one of his partying pals introduced him to a forty-five-year-old snob named Antoine Gombaud. Gombaud, a nobleman whose title was chevalier de Méré, regarded himself as a master of flirtation, and judging by his catalog of romantic entanglements, he was. But de Méré was also an expert gambler who liked the stakes high and won often enough that some suspected him of cheating. And when he stumbled on a little gambling quandary, he turned to Pascal for help. With that, de Méré initiated an investigation that would bring to an end Pascal's scientific dry spell, cement de Méré's own place in the history of ideas, and solve the problem left open by Galileo's work on the grand duke's dice-tossing question.

The year was 1654. The question de Méré brought to Pascal was called the problem of points: Suppose you and another player are playing a game in which you both have equal chances and the first player to earn a certain number of points wins. The game is interrupted with one player in the lead. What is the fairest way to divide the pot? The solution, de Méré noted, should reflect each player's chance of victory given the score that prevails when the game is interrupted. But how do you calculate that?

Pascal realized that whatever the answer, the methods needed to calculate it were yet unknown, and those methods, whatever they were, could have important implications in any type of competitive situation. And yet, as often happens in theoretical research, Pascal found himself unsure of, and even confused about, his plan of attack. He decided he needed a collaborator, or at least another mathematician with whom he could discuss his ideas. Marin Mersenne, the great communicator, had died a few years earlier, but Pascal was still wired into the Académie Mersenne network. And so in 1654 began one of the great correspondences in the history of mathematics, between Pascal and Pierre de Fermat.

In 1654, Fermat held a high position in the Tournelle, or criminal court, in Toulouse. When the court was in session, a finely robed Fermat might be found condemning errant functionaries to be burned at the stake. But when the court was not in session, he would turn his analytic skills to the gentler pursuit of mathematics. He may have been an amateur, but Pierre de Fermat is usually considered the greatest amateur mathematician of all times.

Fermat had not gained his high position through any particular ambition or accomplishment. He achieved it the old-fashioned way, by moving up steadily as his superiors dropped dead of the plague. In fact, when Pascal's letter arrived, Fermat himself was recovering from a bout of the disease. He had even been reported dead, by his friend Bernard Medon. When Fermat didn't die, an embarrassed but presumably happy Medon retracted his announcement, but there is no doubt that Fermat had been on the brink. As it turned out, though twenty-two years Pascal's senior, Fermat would outlive his newfound correspondent by several years.

As we'll see, the problem of points comes up in any area of life in which two entities compete. In their letters, Pascal and Fermat each developed his own approach and solved several versions of the problem. But it was Pascal's method that proved simpler — even beautiful — and yet is general enough to be applied to many problems we encounter in our everyday experience. Because the problem of points first arose in a betting situation, I'll illustrate the problem with an example from the world of sports. In 1996 the Atlanta Braves beat the New York Yankees in the first 2 games of the baseball World Series, in which the first team to win 4 games is crowned champion. The fact that the Braves won the first 2 games didn't necessarily mean they were the superior team. Still, it could be taken as a sign that they were indeed better. Nevertheless, for our current purposes we will stick to the assumption that either team was equally likely to win each game and that the first 2 games just happened to go to the Braves.

Given that assumption, what would have been fair odds for a bet on the Yankees — that is, what was the chance of a Yankee comeback? To calculate it, we count all the ways in which the Yankees could have won and compare that to the number of ways in which they could have lost. Two games of the series had been played, so there were 5 possible games yet to play. And since each of those games had 2 possible outcomes — a Yankee win (Y) or a Braves win (B) — there were 25, or 32, possible outcomes. For instance, the Yankees could have won 3, then lost 2: YYYBB; or they could have alternated victories: YBYBY. (In the latter case, since the Braves would have won 4 games with the 6th game, the last game would never have been played, but we'll get to that in a minute.) The probability that the Yankees would come back to win the series was equal to the number of sequences in which they would win at least 4 games divided by the total number of sequences, 32; the chance that the Braves would win was equal to the number of sequences in which they would win at least 2 more games also divided by 32.

This calculation may seem odd, because as I mentioned, it includes scenarios (such as YBYBY) in which the teams keep playing even after the Braves have won the required 4 games. The teams would certainly not play a 7th game once the Braves had won 4. But mathematics is independent of human whim, and whether or not the players play the games does not affect the fact that such sequences exist. For example, suppose you're playing a coin-toss game in which you win if at any time heads come up. There are 22, or 4, possible two-toss sequences: HT, HH, TH, and TT. In the first two of these, you would not bother tossing the coin again because you would already have won. Still, your chances of winning are 3 in 4 because 3 of the 4 complete sequences include an H.

So in order to calculate the Yankees' and the Braves' chances of victory, we simply make an accounting of the possible 5-game sequences for the remainder of the series. First, the Yankees would have been victorious if they had won 4 of the 5 possible remaining games. That could have happened in 1 of 5 ways: BYYYY, YBYYY, YYBYY, YYYBY, or YYYYB. Alternatively, the Yankees would have triumphed if they had won all 5 of the remaining games, which could have happened in only 1 way: YYYYY. Now for the Braves: they would have become champions if the Yankees had won only 3 games, which could have happened in 10 ways (BBYYY, BYBYY, and so on), or if the Yankees had won only 2 games (which again could have happened in 10 ways), or if the Yankees had won only 1 game (which could have happened in 5 ways), or if they had won none (which could have happened in only 1 way). Adding these possible outcomes together, we find that the chance of a Yankees victory was 6 in 32, or about 19 percent, versus 26 in 32, or about 81 percent for the Braves. According to Pascal and Fermat, if the series had abruptly been terminated, that's how they should have split the bonus pot, and those are the odds that should have been set if a bet was to be made after the first 2 games. For the record, the Yankees did come back to win the next 4 games, and they were crowned champion.

The same reasoning could also be applied to the start of the series — that is, before any game has been played. If the two teams have equal chances of winning each game, you will find, of course, that they have an equal chance of winning the series. But similar reasoning works if they don't have an equal chance, except that the simple accounting I just employed would have to be altered slightly: each outcome would have to be weighted by a factor describing its relative probability. If you do that and analyze the situation at the start of the series, you will discover that in a 7-game series there is a sizable chance that the inferior team will be crowned champion. For instance, if one team is good enough to warrant beating another in 55 percent of its games, the weaker team will nevertheless win a 7-game series about 4 times out of 10. And if the superior team could be expected to beat its opponent, on average, 2 out of each 3 times they meet, the inferior team will still win a 7-game series about once every 5 matchups. There is really no way for sports leagues to change this. In the lopsided 2/3-probability case, for example, you'd have to play a series consisting of at minimum the best of 23 games to determine the winner with what is called statistical significance, meaning the weaker team would be crowned champion 5 percent or less of the time (see chapter 5). And in the case of one team's having only a 55–45 edge, the shortest statistically significant「world series」would be the best of 269 games, a tedious endeavor indeed! So sports playoff series can be fun and exciting, but being crowned「world champion」is not a very reliable indication that a team is actually the best one.

As I said, the same reasoning applies to more than games, gambling, and sports. For example, it shows that if two companies compete head-to-head or two employees within a company compete, though there may be a winner and a loser each quarter or each year, to get a reliable answer regarding which company or which employee is superior by simply tallying who beats whom, you'd have to make the comparison over decades or centuries. If, for instance, employee A is truly superior and would in the long run win a performance comparison with employee B on 60 out of 100 occasions, in a simple best-of-5 series of comparisons the weaker employee will still win almost one-third of the time. It is dangerous to judge ability by short-term results.

The counting in all these problems has been simple enough to carry out without much effort. But when the numbers are higher, the counting becomes difficult. Consider, for example, this problem: You are arranging a wedding reception for 100 guests, and each table seats 10. You can't sit your cousin Rod with your friend Amy because eight years ago they had an affair and she dumped him. On the other hand, both Amy and Leticia want to sit next to your buff cousin Bobby, and your aunt Ruth had better be at a table out of earshot or the dueling flirtations will be gossip fodder for holiday dinners for the next five years. You carefully consider the possibilities. Take just the first table. How many ways are there to choose 10 people from a group of 100? That's the same question as, in how many ways can you apportion 10 investments among 100 mutual funds or 10 germanium atoms among 100 locations in a silicon crystal? It's the type of problem that comes up repeatedly in the theory of randomness, and not only in the problem of points. But with larger numbers it is tedious or impossible to count the possibilities by listing them explicitly. That was Pascal's real accomplishment: a generally applicable and systematic approach to counting that allows you to calculate the answer from a formula or read it off a chart. It is based on a curious arrangement of numbers in the shape of a triangle.

THE COMPUTATIONAL METHOD at the heart of Pascal's work was actually discovered by a Chinese mathematician named Jia Xian around 1050, published by another Chinese mathematician, Zhu Shijie, in 1303, discussed in a work by Cardano in 1570, and plugged into the greater whole of probability theory by Pascal, who ended up getting most of the credit.10 But the prior work didn't bother Pascal.「Let no one say I have said nothing new,」Pascal argued in his autobiography.「The arrangement of the subject is new. When we play tennis, we both play with the same ball, but one of us places it better.」11 The graphic invention employed by Pascal, given below, is thus called Pascal's triangle. In the figure, I have truncated Pascal's triangle at the tenth row, but it can be continued downward indefinitely. In fact, it is easy to continue the triangle, for with the exception of the 1 at the apex, each number is the sum of the number in the line above it to the left and the number in the line above it to the right (add a 0 if there is no number in the line above it to the left or to the right).

Pascal's triangle

Pascal's triangle is useful any time you need to know the number of ways in which you can choose some number of objects from a collection that has an equal or greater number. Here is how it works in the case of the wedding guests: To find the number of distinct seatings of 10 you can form from a group of 100 guests, you would start by looking down the numbers to the left of the triangle until you found the row labeled 100. The triangle I supplied does not go down that far, but for now let's pretend it does. The first number in row 100 tells you the number of ways you can choose 0 guests from a group of 100. There is just 1 way, of course: you simply don't choose anyone. That is true no matter how many total guests you are choosing from, which is why the first number in every row is a 1. The second number in row 100 tells you the number of ways you can choose 1 guest from the group of 100. There are 100 ways to do that: you can choose just guest number 1, or just guest number 2, and so on. That reasoning applies to every row, and so the second number in each row is simply the number of that row. The third number in each row represents the number of distinct groups of 2 you can form, and so on. The number we seek — the number of distinct arrangements of 10 you can form — is therefore the eleventh number in the row. Even if I had extended the triangle to include 100 rows, that number would be far too large to put on the page. In fact, when some wedding guest inevitably complains about the seating arrangements, you might point out how long it would have taken you to consider every possibility: assuming you spent one second considering each one, it would come to roughly 10,000 billion years. The unhappy guest will assume, of course, that you are being histrionic.

In order for us to use Pascal's triangle, let's say for now that your guest list consists of just 10 guests. Then the relevant row is the one at the bottom of the triangle I provided, labeled 10. The numbers in that row represent the number of distinct tables of 0, 1, 2, and so on, that can be formed from a collection of 10 people. You may recognize these numbers from the sixth-grade quiz example — the number of ways in which a student can get a given number of problems wrong on a 10-question true-or-false test is the same as the number of ways in which you can choose guests from a group of 10. That is one of the reasons for the power of Pascal's triangle: the same mathematics can be applied to many different situations. For the Yankees-Braves World Series example, in which we tediously counted all the possibilities for the remaining 5 games, we can now read the number of ways in which the Yankees can win 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, or 5 games directly from row 5 of the triangle:

1 5 10 10 5 1

We can see at a glance that the Yankees' chance of winning 2 games (10 ways) was twice as high as their chance of winning 1 game (5 ways).

Once you learn the method, applications of Pascal's triangle crop up everywhere. A friend of mine once worked for a start-up computer-games company. She would often relate how, although the marketing director conceded that small focus groups were suited for「qualitative conclusions only,」she nevertheless sometimes reported an「overwhelming」4-to-2 or 5-to-1 agreement among the members of the group as if it were meaningful. But suppose you hold a focus group in which 6 people will examine and comment on a new product you are developing. Suppose that in actuality the product appeals to half the population. How accurately will this preference be reflected in your focus group? Now the relevant line of the triangle is the one labeled 6, representing the number of possible subgroups of 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, or 6 whose members might like (or dislike) your product:

1 6 15 20 15 6 1

From these numbers we see that there are 20 ways in which the group members could split 50/50, accurately reflecting the views of the populace at large. But there are also 1 + 6 + 15 + 15 + 6 + 1 = 44 ways in which you might find an unrepresentative consensus, either for or against. So if you are not careful, the chances of being misled are 44 out of 64, or about two-thirds. This example does not prove that if agreement is achieved, it is random. But neither should you assume that it is significant.

Pascal and Fermat's analysis proved to be a big first step in a coherent mathematical theory of randomness. The final letter of their famous exchange is dated October 27, 1654. A few weeks later Pascal sat in a trance for two hours. Some call that trance a mystical experience. Others lament that he had finally blasted off from planet Sanity. However you describe it, Pascal emerged from the event a transformed man. It was a transformation that would lead him to make one more fundamental contribution to the concept of randomness.

IN 1662, a few days after Pascal died, a servant noticed a curious bulge in one of Pascal's jackets. The servant pulled open the lining to find hidden within it folded sheets of parchment and paper. Pascal had apparently carried them with him every day for the last eight years of his life. Scribbled on the sheets, in his handwriting, was a series of isolated words and phrases dated November 23, 1654. The writings were an emotional account of the trance, in which he described how God had come to him and in the space of two hours delivered him from his corrupt ways.

Following that revelation, Pascal had dropped most of his friends, calling them「horrible attachments.」12 He sold his carriage, his horses, his furniture, his library — everything except his Bible. He gave his money to the poor, leaving himself with so little that he often had to beg or borrow to obtain food. He wore an iron belt with points on the inside so that he was in constant discomfort and pushed the belt's spikes into his flesh whenever he found himself in danger of feeling happy. He denounced his studies of mathematics and science. Of his childhood fascination with geometry, he wrote,「I can scarcely remember that there is such a thing as geometry. I recognize geometry to be so useless…it is quite possible I shall never think of it again.」13

Yet Pascal remained productive. In the years that followed the trance, he recorded his thoughts about God, religion, and life. Those thoughts were later published in a book titled Pensées, a work that is still in print today. And although Pascal had denounced mathematics, amid his vision of the futility of the worldly life is a mathematical exposition in which he trained his weapon of mathematical probability squarely on a question of theology and created a contribution just as important as his earlier work on the problem of points.

The mathematics in Pensées is contained in two manuscript pages covered on both sides by writing going in every direction and full of erasures and corrections. In those pages, Pascal detailed an analysis of the pros and cons of one's duty to God as if he were calculating mathematically the wisdom of a wager. His great innovation was his method of balancing those pros and cons, a concept that is today called mathematical expectation.

Pascal's argument went like this: Suppose you concede that you don't know whether or not God exists and therefore assign a 50 percent chance to either proposition. How should you weigh these odds when deciding whether to lead a pious life? If you act piously and God exists, Pascal argued, your gain — eternal happiness — is infinite. If, on the other hand, God does not exist, your loss, or negative return, is small — the sacrifices of piety. To weigh these possible gains and losses, Pascal proposed, you multiply the probability of each possible outcome by its payoff and add them all up, forming a kind of average or expected payoff. In other words, the mathematical expectation of your return on piety is one-half infinity (your gain if God exists) minus one-half a small number (your loss if he does not exist). Pascal knew enough about infinity to know that the answer to this calculation is infinite, and thus the expected return on piety is infinitely positive. Every reasonable person, Pascal concluded, should therefore follow the laws of God. Today this argument is known as Pascal's wager.

Expectation is an important concept not just in gambling but in all decision making. In fact, Pascal's wager is often considered the founding of the mathematical discipline of game theory, the quantitative study of optimal decision strategies in games. I must admit I find such thinking addictive, and so I sometimes carry it a bit too far.「How much does that parking meter cost?」I ask my son. The sign says 25¢. Yes, but 1 time in every 20 or so visits, I come back late and find a ticket, which runs `$`40, so the 25¢ cost of the meter is really just a cruel lure, I explain, because my real cost is `$`2.25. (The extra `$`2 comes from my 1 in 20 chance of getting a ticket multiplied by its `$`40 cost.)「How about our driveway,」I ask my other son,「is it a toll road?」Well, we've lived at the house about 5 years, or roughly 2,400 times of backing down the driveway, and 3 times I've clipped my mirror on the protruding fence post at `$`400 a shot. You may as well put a toll box out there and toss in 50¢ each time you back up, he tells me. He understands expectation. (He also recommends that I refrain from driving them to school before I've had my morning coffee.)

Looking at the world through the lens of mathematical expectation, one often comes upon surprising results. For example, a recent sweepstakes sent through the mail offered a grand prize of `$`5 million.14 All you had to do to win was mail in your entry. There was no limit on how many times you could enter, but each entry had to be mailed in separately. The sponsors were apparently expecting about 200 million entries, because the fine print said that the chances of winning were 1 in 200 million. Does it pay to enter this kind of「free sweepstakes offer」? Multiplying the probability of winning times the payoff, we find that each entry was worth 1/40 of `$`1, or 2.5¢ — far less than the cost of mailing it in. In fact, the big winner in this contest was the post office, which, if the projections were correct, made nearly `$`80 million in postage revenue on all the submissions.

Here's another crazy game. Suppose the state of California made its citizens the following offer: Of all those who pay the dollar or two to enter, most will receive nothing, one person will receive a fortune, and one person will be put to death in a violent manner. Would anyone enroll in that game? People do, and with enthusiasm. It is called the state lottery. And although the state does not advertise it in the manner in which I have described it, that is the way it works in practice. For while one lucky person wins the grand prize in each game, many millions of other contestants drive to and from their local ticket vendors to purchase their tickets, and some die in accidents along the way. Applying statistics from the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration and depending on such assumptions as how far each individual drives, how many tickets he or she buys, and how many people are involved in a typical accident, you find that a reasonable estimate of those fatalities is about one death per game.

State governments tend to ignore arguments about the possible bad effects of lotteries. That's because, for the most part, they know enough about mathematical expectation to arrange that for each ticket purchased, the expected winnings — the total prize money divided by the number of tickets sold — is less than the cost of the ticket. This generally leaves a tidy difference that can be diverted to state coffers. In 1992, however, some investors in Melbourne, Australia, noticed that the Virginia Lottery violated this principle.15 The lottery involved picking 6 numbers from 1 to 44. Pascal's triangle, should we find one that goes that far, would show that there are 7,059,052 ways of choosing 6 numbers from a group of 44. The lottery jackpot was `$`27 million, and with second, third, and fourth prizes included, the pot grew to `$`27,918,561. The clever investors reasoned, if they bought one ticket with each of the possible 7,059,052 number combinations, the value of those tickets would equal the value of the pot. That made each ticket worth about `$`27.9 million divided by 7,059,052, or about `$`3.95. For what price was the state of Virginia, in all its wisdom, selling the tickets? The usual `$`1.

The Australian investors quickly found 2,500 small investors in Australia, New Zealand, Europe, and the United States willing to put up an average of `$`3,000 each. If the scheme worked, the yield on that investment would be about `$`10,800. There were some risks in their plan. For one, since they weren't the only ones buying tickets, it was possible that another player or even more than one other player would also choose the winning ticket, meaning they would have to split the pot. In the 170 times the lottery had been held, there was no winner 120 times, a single winner only 40 times, and two winners just 10 times. If those frequencies reflected accurately their odds, then the data suggested there was a 120 in 170 chance they would get the pot all to themselves, a 40 in 170 chance they would end up with half the pot, and a 10 in 170 chance they would win just a third of it. Recalculating their expected winnings employing Pascal's principle of mathematical expectation, they found them to be (120/170 × `$`27.9 million) + (40/170 × `$`13.95 million) + (10/170 × `$`6.975 million) = `$`23.4 million. That is `$`3.31 per ticket, a great return on a `$`1 expenditure even after expenses.

But there was another danger: the logistic nightmare of completing the purchase of all the tickets by the lottery deadline. That could lead to the expenditure of a significant portion of their funds with no significant prize to show for it.

The members of the investment group made careful preparations. They filled out 1.4 million slips by hand, as required by the rules, each slip good for five games. They placed groups of buyers at 125 retail outlets and obtained cooperation from grocery stores, which profited from each ticket they sold. The scheme got going just seventy-two hours before the deadline. Grocery-store employees worked in shifts to sell as many tickets as possible. One store sold 75,000 in the last forty-eight hours. A chain store accepted bank checks for 2.4 million tickets, assigned the work of printing the tickets among its stores, and hired couriers to gather them. Still, in the end, the group ran out of time: they had purchased just 5 million of the 7,059,052 tickets.

Several days passed after the winning ticket was announced, and no one came forward to present it. The consortium had won, but it took its members that long to find the winning ticket. Then, when state lottery officials discovered what the consortium had done, they balked at paying. A month of legal wrangling ensued before the officials concluded they had no valid reason to deny the group. Finally, they paid out the prize.

To the study of randomness, Pascal contributed both his ideas about counting and the concept of mathematical expectation. Who knows what else he might have discovered, despite his renouncing mathematics, if his health had held up. But it did not. In July 1662, Pascal became seriously ill. His physicians prescribed the usual remedies: they bled him and administered violent purges, enemas, and emetics. He improved for a while, and then the illness returned, along with severe headaches, dizziness, and convulsions. Pascal vowed that if he survived, he would devote his life to helping the poor and asked to be moved to a hospital for the incurable, in order that, if he died, he would be in their company. He did die, a few days later, in August 1662. He was thirty-nine. An autopsy found the cause of death to be a brain hemorrhage, but it also revealed lesions in his liver, stomach, and intestines that accounted for the illnesses that had plagued him throughout his life.

### Notes

1 Bengt Ankarloo and Stuart Clark, eds., Witchcraft and Magic in Europe: The Period of the Witch Trials (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 2002), pp. 99–104.

2 Meghan Collins,「Traders Ward Off Evil Spirits,」October 31, 2003, http://www.CNNMoney.com/2003/10/28/markets_trader_superstition/index.htm.

3 Henk Tijms, Understanding Probability: Chance Rules in Everyday Life (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2004), p. 16.

4 Ibid., p. 80.

5 David, Gods, Games and Gambling, p. 65.

6 Blaise Pascal, quoted in Jean Steinmann, Pascal, trans. Martin Turnell (New York: Harcourt, Brace & World, 1962), p. 72.

7 Gilberte Pascal, quoted in Morris Bishop, Pascal: The Life of a Genius (1936; repr., New York: Greenwood Press, 1968), p. 47.

8 Ibid., p. 137.

9 Gilberte Pascal, quoted ibid., p. 135.

10 See A.W.F. Edwards, Pascal's Arithmetical Triangle: The Story of a Mathematical Idea (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2002).

11 Blaise Pascal, quoted in Herbert Westren Turnbull, The Great Mathematicians (New York: New York University Press, 1961), p. 131.

12 Blaise Pascal, quoted in Bishop, Pascal, p. 196.

13 Blaise Pascal, quoted in David, Gods, Games and Gambling, p. 252.

14 Bruce Martin,「Coincidences: Remarkable or Random?」Skeptical Inquirer 22, no. 5 (September/October 1998).

15 Holland, What Are the Chances? pp. 86–89.

0401追寻通往成功的路径

在卡尔达诺的时代，如果有赌徒能够得知他在随机性方面的数学成就，就能利用这些知识，在跟不那么聪明的人赌博时赚到可观的利润。换成今天，卡尔达诺同样能写出诸如《与容易上当的笨蛋玩扔骰子之傻瓜指南》这样的书，并靠它名利双收。但在他那个时代，卡尔达诺的工作却没有激起多少涟漪。《机遇博弈》一书在他死后很久也未能出版。为什么卡尔达诺的工作没能产生多大的影响？正如我们之前已经提到的那样，对他之前的人而言，通往概率论的障碍之一，就在于缺乏一个良好的代数符号体系；到卡尔达诺时，虽然符号系统有了改进，但只能算处在襁褓之中。另外还有一个障碍需要跨越：卡尔达诺完成他的工作的时代，是一个人们认为神秘咒语比数学运算更有用的时代。如果人们根本就没打算找寻自然的秩序，也不曾考虑要创造一种对事件的数值描述，那么一个用来阐述随机性对这些事件的影响的理论，自然注定是不会被人赏识的。后来的历史表明，如果卡尔达诺能多活几十年，他所达到的成就，以及这些成就能被接受的程度，就完全是另一码事了。因为在他死后的几十年里，欧洲的思想与信念发生了历史性转变，这个转变常常被称为科学革命。

对于刚刚摆脱中世纪桎梏的欧洲而言，科学革命是对当时大众思维方式的一次反叛。在中世纪这个刚刚成为历史的时代中，人们关于世界运转方式的观念，还未被任何人以系统的方式深究过。某个小城的商人会偷走被绞死者的衣服，因为他相信这有助于啤酒的销量；而另一个小城教区的居民则相信，裸体围着教堂的祭坛绕圈并吟唱渎神的祷歌可以治愈疾病。某人甚至相信使用了「错误」的厕所会带来坏运气。事实上，该名证券交易员是在 2003 年向 CNN（美国有限电视新闻网）记者坦白这个秘密的。没错，至今还有人仍然迷信，但到了今天，只要你有兴趣，我们就能拥有可以证明或证伪类似行为的功效的知性工具。不过，对于卡尔达诺同时代的人来说，他们并不会对扔赢骰子的经验进行数学分析，而是会跑去做一次感恩祷告，或者从此再也不洗当时穿的那双幸运袜子。卡尔达诺自己也相信，之所以会出现一连串的失败，是因为「幸运之神也有些不快」了，而要改变此种状况，方法之一就是把骰子狠狠地扔一下。如果我们可以把幸运之 7 的彩票结果玩弄于股掌之上，为什么还要对数学卑躬屈膝呢？

常被视为科学革命转折点的那个时刻，出现在 1583 年，此时距卡尔达诺去世才不过 7 年。比萨大学一名年轻的学生正坐在大教堂中。传说他并没有聆听教堂中进行的仪式，却在怔怔地看着一个东西，一件他觉得比那些仪式更有启发性的事情：一盏巨大的吊灯在来回摆动。伽利略用自己的脉搏计时，发现吊灯摆过一个长弧形所用的时间，似乎跟它摆过一个较短弧形的时间是一样的。这个观察似乎暗示着：一个摆完成一次摆动所需的时间，与摆动的幅度无关。伽利略的观察精确而实用，它虽然很简单，却代表了一条描述物理现象的新道路：科学必须专注于经验与实验，即大自然的运作方式，而非直觉认定或对我们更具吸引力的什么东西。最重要的是，这个描述必须通过数学来完成。

伽利略利用他在科学方面的技巧，写了一篇有关赌博的短文《骰子游戏之思考》。这项工作是在其资助人托斯卡纳大公的要求下完成的。困扰大公的问题是这样的：为什么扔 3 次骰子，出现总点数为 10 点的情况比 9 点更频繁？这个频率上的差别只有区区 8% 左右，而且，扔出 10 点或 9 点的情况都并不常见，因此大公能够发现这个微小的差别，一定是在这个骰子游戏上花费了相当多的时间。看来相比于伽利略，大公更需要一个 12 步赌瘾戒除计划。不过不管是什么原因，伽利略对这个问题没有多大兴趣，也不免对这个任务嘟嘟囔囔牢骚满腹。但跟每个不想丢掉饭碗的顾问一样，他把这些牢骚吞进了自己的肚子，然后该干什么还是得干什么。

单独扔一次骰子，每个点数出现的机会都是 1/6。但如果扔两次骰子，可能出现的总点数的机会就不再均等了。例如，扔出 2 点的机会是 1/36，而扔出 3 点的机会要高一倍。造成这个差异的原因在于，如果扔两次骰子，那么只有一种情况能得到 2 点 —— 两次都是 1 点；而扔出 3 点则有两种情况 —— 先扔出 1 点再扔出 2 点，或者先 2 点之后是 1 点。沿着这个思路走下去，就是我们理解随机过程的下一步，同时也是本章的主题：如何建立一种系统性的方法，来分析事件的不同出现方式的数量。

为了理解大公的困惑，让我们把自己想象成一名《塔木德》学者，然后来看看这个问题：与其试图解释为什么 10 点比 9 点出现得更频繁，不如问问为什么 10 点不应该比 9 点出现得更频繁。我们可以给出一个很容易让人接受的理由，来说明 10 点和 9 点应当出现得同样频繁：如果扔 3 次骰子，那么我们有 6 种方式得到 10 点和 9 点。扔出 9 点的方式是（621）、（531）、（522）、（441）和（333）；10 点则是（631）、（622）、（541）、（532）、（442）和（433）。根据卡尔达诺的样本空间定律，得到一个好结果的概率，等于所有好结果在所有可能结果中所占的比例。既然 9 点和 10 点能通过同样多的方式得到，为什么其中一个会比另一个更可能发生呢？

原因正如我说的那样，原始形式的样本空间定律只适用于等可能性的结果，而上述的点数组合，各自发生的可能性并不相等。比如扔出（631），即扔出 1 个 6 点、1 个 3 点和 1 个 1 点的可能性，6 倍于扔出（333）的可能性，因为扔出 3 个 3 点的方式只有 1 种，而扔出 1 个 6 点、1 个 3 点和 1 个 1 点的方式却有 6 种：先 6 后 3 后 1，或先 1 后 3 后 6，等等。现在，我们换种方式表示扔骰子的结果：我们用逗号隔开的三元组来表示投掷结果，并以此区分扔骰子的次序。简单来说，（631）这个结果由以下的可能组合给出：（1, 3, 6）、（1, 6, 3）、（3, 1, 6）、（3, 6, 1）、（6, 1, 3）和（6, 3, 1）；而（333）这个结果只能是（3, 3, 3）。将扔骰子的结果如此分解之后，新方式下的各种结果就具有了相等的可能性，这时我们就能应用样本空间定律了。这种情况下，扔出 10 点的方式有 27 种，而扔出 9 点的只有 25 种，伽利略由此得出结论，即扔三次骰子得到 10 点的可能性，是得到 9 点的可能性的 27/25，即约 1.08 倍。

在这个问题的解决过程中，伽利略隐含地使用了我们的下一条重要原则：一个事件发生的可能性，依赖于这个事件所有可能发生方式的数量。这一事实并不让人吃惊，真正让人吃惊的，是这条原则造成的影响，以及这个数量的计算难度。假设全班 25 名 6 年级学生进行了一次 10 道判断题的小测验，让我们来算算某个学生可能得到的测验结果有多少种：她可能 10 道题全对；她可能只错 1 道题 —— 出现这种情况的方式有 10 种，因为总共有 10 道题供她挑出一个来犯错；她可能只错 2 道题 —— 这种情况对应了 45 种方式，因为这 10 道题能组成 45 对不同的题目构成的题对儿；等等。这样组合的结果就是，假设有一大群学生，他们都是靠碰运气来猜答案的，那么平均而言，对应着每一个得满分的学生，将会有 10 个得 90 分的学生和 45 个得 80 分的学生。得到 50 分左右的成绩的可能性就更高了。对于一个有 25 名学生的班级来说，如果学生都靠猜，那么至少有一名学生能得到 B（80 分）或更高分的概率，差不多是 75%。因此，一名老教师在多年从教中所碰到的那些考前不好好复习、测验时多少在赌一把的学生中，很可能会有一些人的最后得分为 A 或 B。

几年前，加拿大彩票管理部门决定，将一些以往积累下来的无人认领奖金返还给彩民。在这个过程中，他们可结结实实地领教了认真数数的重要性。该部门购买了 500 辆小汽车作为奖品，然后编写了一个计算机程序，从 240 万个彩票订户号中随机抽出 500 个作为奖品的赢取者。官方公布了这 500 个未排序的获奖号码，并承诺每个号码都能赢得一辆汽车。使他们大为尴尬的是，有一个人（正确地）宣称他赢得了两辆汽车。官员们哑然失色 —— 计算机怎么可能从 200 多万个数字中，两次抽中同一个数字呢？是不是程序有问题？

这些彩票官员碰到的计数问题，和「生日问题」是等价的，这个问题问：「如果希望一群人中出现某两人生日相同（假定每天出生的可能性都相等）的可能性大于 50%，这个群体至少应该有多少人？」大多数人都觉得答案应该是一年中天数的一半，也就是大约 183 人。不过如果问题问的是：「要一群人中有某人与你同一天生日的可能性大于 50%，这个群体至少应该有多少人？」那么上面的答案是正确的。但如果问题没有限制到底是哪两个人同一天出生，那么问题的答案被这样一对儿生日相同的人的组合方式的数量戏剧性地改变了。实际上，我们需要的人数少得令人吃惊：仅仅需要 23 个人就够了。如果像加拿大彩票的情况那样，从 240 万个数字中挑数字，我们当然需要远多于 500 个数字，以保证出现重复数字的可能性大于 50%，但仅仅是 500 个数字中发生重复的可能性，也绝非可以忽略不计：实际上，这个概率大约是 5%。不大，但仍然是个需要解决的问题，比如我们可以在计算机每抽取一个数字后，就将它与所有已抽出的数字进行比对，确定是否发生了重复抽取。据报道，加拿大彩票部门要求这个幸运儿放弃一辆汽车，但是遭到拒绝。

而在 1995 年 6 月 21 日的德国，发生了另一起让许多人眼珠子都掉出来的彩票神秘事件。那是一个被称为乐透 6/49 的彩票抽奖，中奖的 6 个号码从数字 1 到 49 中随机抽得。这天的中奖号码是 15-2527-30-42-48，而完全相同的中奖号码在 1986 年 12 月 20 日那天也被抽到过。在这个彩票 3016 次抽奖的历史上，出现重复的中奖序列，这可是破天荒的头一遭。那发生这种事情的可能性有多大呢？并不像你想的那么小。算一算你就会发现，在进行抽奖的这些年里，在某个时刻发生中奖号码重复的概率大概是 28%。

在一个随机过程中，某结果的可能发生方式的数量，是决定该结果发生概率的关键因素之一，因此我们现在的关键问题就在于，怎样才能计算出某事件可能发生方式的数量？伽利略似乎没有注意到这个问题的重要性，他也没有在这个骰子问题上深入下去。不仅如此，他在论文的第一段就说，他之所以写下这篇有关骰子的文章，完全是因为「命令」。1633 年，伽利略收到了他所提出的通往科学的新方法的奖赏 —— 宗教裁判所判处的刑罚。但科学与神学从此永远地分道扬镳了：从这一刻起，科学家卸下了神学家所提出的「（这个世界）为什么（会这样）」的包袱，转而专注于分析「（物理现象是）如何（运作）」的问题。不久之后，那些从小就接受伽利略科学哲学教诲的新一代学者中的一员，将把对可能事件进行计数的数学分析带到一个全新的高度和认知水平上，而如果没有这些认知，当今科学中的绝大部分内容都将无法开展。

随着科学革命欣欣向荣，随机性研究的前线从意大利移到法国。在那里，抛弃了亚里士多德而跟随伽利略的新科学家们，将研究推至比卡尔达诺和伽利略更远也更深的境地。新成就的重要性这次终于为人所知，并形成一股席卷欧洲的浪潮。新观点和新思路再次诞生于博弈这个大背景下，但这些科学家中的第一人，却由数学家变为赌徒，而不是像卡尔达诺那样从赌徒变成数学家。这位科学家的名字是布莱瑟·帕斯卡。

帕斯卡 1623 年 7 月出生于巴黎南边 250 英里以外的克莱蒙费朗。他的父亲发现了儿子的聪明才智，正好又搬家到了巴黎，因此，他推荐 13 岁的帕斯卡加入一个新成立的讨论群。成员们都称这个群体为梅赛纳学院 —— 以创建该团体的黑袍修士的名字命名。梅赛纳的小圈子包括著名哲学家与数学家笛卡儿，以及业余数学天才费马。这些睿智的思想家与自大狂的奇特组合 —— 再加上梅赛纳的积极引导，对十多岁的布莱瑟产生了巨大的影响。他与费马和笛卡儿建立了私人往来，并迅速认识到科学新方法的深层基础。「让所有亚里士多德的信徒……」他写道，「认识到实验才是物理学必须遵从的真正主人。」

但一个有着神圣信仰的乏味的书呆子，怎么会跟城里的赌博圈扯上关系呢？帕斯卡一直断断续续地经受着胃痛的折磨，他吞咽困难，而要让吞下的东西不再返上来也不容易。此外，他还忍受着使人体质变差的虚弱、严重的头痛、一阵阵冒虚汗以及腿部部分瘫痪的折磨。他坚强地遵从医生的建议，这些建议包括使用放血疗法、服用泻药以及驴奶和其他「令人作呕的」药剂，而喝下去的那些药剂差不多都被他吐了出来 —— 按他姐姐吉尔贝特的说法，这些治疗完全是一种「不折不扣的虐待」。帕斯卡这时已经离开了巴黎，但在 1647 年夏天，已经 24 岁并对自己的身体开始绝望的他，和妹妹杰奎琳再次回来，希望能找到更好的治疗方法。新医生们提出一个在当时属于最为先进的建议：帕斯卡「应该放下一切持续的精神负担，并尽可能通过寻欢作乐放松心情」。因此，帕斯卡教会了自己如何好好休息和放松，并开始在其他追求享乐的年轻人的陪伴下打发时间。1651 年，帕斯卡的父亲去世，他突然间成了一个二十来岁的遗产继承人。他对这笔财产的使用相当到位，至少从之前医生建议的角度而言是这样的。传记作家们把 1651 年到 1654 年这几年称为帕斯卡的「入世时期」，而吉尔贝特则称这段时间为「他生命中最被糟蹋的时光」。尽管在自身思想水平的提升方面做了一些努力，但是帕斯卡的科学研究毫无起色。不过根据记载来看，他此时的健康状况倒是达到了最佳状况。

在历史上，有关随机性的研究，常常得益于一些本身就是随机的事件。帕斯卡的成就便是这样一个例子：正是由于他放弃了研究，才最终走向了对机遇的研究。所有这一切，都源于一个派对伙伴把他介绍给了 45 岁的势利之徒安托万·贡博。拥有德·梅雷骑士头衔的贵族贡博一直自视为调情大师，而他的罗曼史的长名单，也充分表明他确实无愧于这一称号。但除此之外，德·梅雷还是一名喜欢在赌桌上一掷千金的专业级赌徒，而且他赢钱的次数之多，让人怀疑他可能是在出老千。德·梅雷曾经因为一个小小的赌博方面的问题而深感困惑，于是他找到帕斯卡寻求帮助。德·梅雷此举引发的研究，宣告了帕斯卡科研枯竭期的结束，也确立了德·梅雷在思想史上的地位，并解决了大公扔骰子问题中伽利略遗留的未解之难题。

德·梅雷提出这个被称为「点数问题」的困惑的时间是 1654 年。问题是这样的：假设你跟对手玩一个游戏，在游戏中你们俩有相等的得分机会，而总分首先达到某个给定值的一方获胜。当游戏进行了一段时间后，游戏暂停，然后让其他赌徒下注赌谁是最终的胜者。那么在这种情况下，我们应该如何确定赔率才是最公平的？德·梅雷注意到，在给定了游戏暂停时对局者各自的分数时，这个确定赔率的方法，应该能够体现对局者各自最终获胜的概率。但如何计算这两个概率呢？

2『概率论的始祖问题，做一张主题卡片。（2021-02-19）』

帕斯卡认识到，不管这个问题的答案是什么，所需的计算方法在当时都是未知的。进一步说，不管这个方法是怎样的，它都可能在任何类型的竞争中具有重要的实用价值。但正如理论研究中常常会发生的事情那样，帕斯卡发现自己对想要采取的方法并不确定，甚至还感到很困扰。最终，他决定寻找一位合作者，或者至少是一位他可以与之讨论想法的数学家。当时，梅赛纳这位了不起的交流者已经亡故数年，但帕斯卡与梅赛纳学院这个网络仍保持着联系。得益于此，我们才能看到从 1654 年开始的数学史上最伟大的书信往来之一 —— 帕斯卡与费马之间的系列通信。

1654 年的费马在图卢兹刑事法庭身居高位。你也许能在开庭的时候，看着身着华丽长袍的费马将罪人处以火刑。但闭庭时，他会把他在分析方面的能力转移到更为温柔的数学探究之中。费马也许只是个业余爱好者，但他常常被认为是古往今来最伟大的业余数学家。

费马并不是靠什么不寻常的野心或成就获得这个职位的。他的方法其实相当老套：当他的上级一个个死于瘟疫时，他一步步稳稳地爬了上去。事实上，当帕斯卡的信寄到费马手中时，他自然也刚从一次瘟疫中慢慢康复过来。费马的朋友贝尔纳·梅东甚至还宣布了他的死讯。不过费马并没有死，尴尬却又开心的梅东收回了他的公告。但是费马曾经一只脚踩进鬼门关这一点，倒是没有什么可怀疑的。虽然费马比帕斯卡年长 22 岁，但他实际上比这位新的通信伙伴还要晚几年才去世。

正如我们下面将要看到的那样，在两个实体存在竞争的任何领域，这个点数问题都会出现。帕斯卡和费马在他们的通信中，各自建立了一套方法，并解决了几个不同版本的点数问题。但后来的事实证明，帕斯卡的方法更简单 —— 甚至可以称为漂亮，而且具有足够的普适性，能够用在许多日常问题的解决中。由于点数问题最初的提出源于赌赛，因此我将用一个体育比赛的例子对其加以说明。在 1996 年的世界职业棒球锦标赛中，亚特兰大勇士队在头两场比赛里都击败了纽约洋基队。而最先获得 4 场胜利的球队将获得冠军。勇士队赢得头两场比赛的事实，当然并不必然意味着其实力更强，但不管怎样，我们将这种情况视为勇士队球员的确更强一些的一个迹象。不过，考虑到我们讨论的目的，我们将一直假设，在一场比赛中，两队各自获胜的可能性是相等的，而头两场比赛不过凑巧都是勇士队赢了而已。

根据这个假设，我们应该给洋基队的获胜定一个怎样的赔率才合适呢？或者洋基队大翻盘的可能性有多大？为了计算这个结果，让我们数一数所有洋基队获胜的可能方式，然后跟其落败的可能方式进行比较。现在这个 7 局系列赛中的两场比赛已经结束，还剩下 5 场可能的比赛。每场比赛都有两种可能的结果，即洋基队获胜（Y）或勇士队获胜（B），因此我们一共有 2^5 即 32 种可能的系列赛结果。比如，洋基队可能先赢 3 场再输 2 场：YYYBB；或者两队有来有往交替获胜：YBYBY。（在后一种情况中，由于勇士队在第 6 场结束时已经获得了 4 场胜利，最后一场就不用比了。不过我们等下再谈这个问题。）因此，洋基队翻盘获得冠军的可能性，就等于这些比赛结果序列中，它至少赢得 4 场比赛的数量，再除以这些可能序列的总数 32；而勇士队获得冠军的可能性，则等于它至少赢得两场比赛的序列数除以 32。

1『一个小窍门，先把概率空间里的总数算出来，这里是 $2^5$，即 32 个。（2021-02-19）』

这种计算方式看起来有点儿怪，因为正如我们提及的，序列中包括了（如 YBYBY 这样的）两队在勇士队赢得所需的 4 场胜利后仍然继续比赛的情况，可一旦勇士队赢了 4 场，这两支球队肯定不会再比第 7 场了。不过人类制定的这些稀奇古怪的规矩并不会影响数学：不论球员们比赛或不比赛，这种结果的存在都不会受影响。假设你扔硬币，只要扔出正面朝上就算赢。那么，扔两次硬币的可能结果有 2^2 即 4 个：正反、正正、反正和反反。如果扔出的是前两种结果，你就不用扔第二次了，因为扔第一次时你就已经赢了，但你获胜的概率仍然是 3/4，因为 4 个可能结果中有 3 个包含了一次正面朝上。

因此，要计算洋基队和勇士队各自获胜的可能性，只需要简单地数一数，系列赛剩下的 5 场比赛将产生哪些可能的比赛结果序列。首先，洋基队如果在 5 场中胜了 4 场，它就能获胜，而这个结果，可以按以下 5 种方式之一发生：BYYYY、YBYYY、YYBYY、YYYBY 或 YYYYB。此外，洋基队还可以用 5 战全胜的战绩班师，此时只有一种组合方式：YYYYY。再来看看勇士队，如果它想当冠军，就需要洋基队只赢 3 场，对应着 10 种可能的发生方式（BBYYY、BYBYY 等等），或者只赢两场（同样有 10 种可能的发生方式），或者只赢一场（5 种可能的发生方式），或者一场都赢不了（只有一种可能的发生方式）。将这些结果加起来，我们发现，洋基队获得冠军的可能性是 6/32，或者约 19%；而勇士队为 26/32，即约 81%。根据帕斯卡和费马的说法，如果系列赛在第二场后被中断，那么赌徒们对最终冠军归属所下的赌注就应以 19∶81 的比例进行，而这也是此时对勇士队获胜应该设置的赔率。最终，洋基队确实来了个大翻盘，它在之后的 4 场比赛中取得连胜，成为冠军。

这种推理方法同样能够用在系列赛刚刚开始的时候，也就是任何比赛一场都没有比的时候。如果两队赢得一场比赛的可能性相等，那么它们理所当然在系列赛刚开始时具有相等的机会赢得冠军。不过，即使一场比赛的双方获胜的概率不一样，类似的推理也一样能用。在这种情况下，我们只需要将原来简单累计所有可能方式的做法稍加修改，给每种可能方式乘以一个与其相对应的概率权值之后再求和就可以了。如果我们在系列赛开始前用这种方法进行分析，就会发现，对一个 7 场比赛构成的系列赛，哪怕是较弱的一方也有相当大的夺冠机会。例如，假设强队在比赛中获胜的概率是 55%，即便如此，弱队也能赢得 10 次系列赛中的 4 次。平均而言，强队在与较弱的对手交战时，如果每 3 次可以胜出两次，那么弱队仍然可以在 5 次系列赛中获胜一次。不过说实话，对体育联赛而言，这种情况确实没办法改变。拿刚才这个 2/3 胜率的例子来说，如果我们希望最终冠军的归属具有所谓的统计显著性，那么系列赛至少得由 23 场比赛组成，此时弱队只有不大于 5% 的机会能获得最终的胜利（见第 5 章）。而对 55∶45 这样的强弱对比，具有统计显著性的「世界职业棒球锦标赛」至少需要 269 场比赛。嗯，好个冗长的赛事！因此，季后赛确实非常有趣而且刺激，但在成为「世界冠军」这一点上，它并不能可靠地表明某队确实就是最强的。

如我所言，这个方法并不仅限于对弈、赌博与体育比赛。如果两个公司狭路相逢要一争高下，或者同一个公司中的两名职员要比个胜负，那么在这种情况下，尽管每个季度或年度都一定有赢家和输家，但是如果想根据简单的胜负记录，可靠地确定哪家公司或哪个雇员更好一些，恐怕得花上几十年乃至几百年才行。比如，如果职员 A 确实更好一些，而且长期来看，100 次中有 60 次 A 能胜过 B，那么在一场 5 战 3 胜制的较量中，较差的 B 仍有近 1/3 的机会获胜。利用短期结果来评估能力，是一种相当危险的做法。

上面这些计数问题都很简单，不费什么力气就可以搞定。但是，当涉及的数值较大时，计数过程就会变得十分困难。考虑一下后面这个问题：假设你在筹备一场婚礼，要负责 100 位宾客的接待工作。每张桌子能坐 10 个人。不过罗德表哥和你的朋友艾米不能坐在一起，因为 8 年前他们有过感情纠葛，艾米把罗德给甩了；另一方面，艾米和利蒂希娅都想挨着你那身材健美的鲍比表弟坐；露兹姨妈则最好坐到「隔墙无耳」的那一桌去，否则她那些争风吃醋的调情，将成为接下来的 5 年中假日聚餐时源源不断的八卦来源。你仔细地考虑着种种情况。先考虑第一张桌子吧。从 100 个人中挑出 10 个，有多少种可能的挑选方式？这个问题也等价于从 100 只基金中挑出 10 只来投资，或者从一块硅晶体的 100 个位置中挑出 10 个来放锗原子，有多少种挑选方式？类似的问题反复出现在随机性理论中，而不仅仅是在点数问题中才存在。当数量很大时，一五一十地罗列所有可能的情况来计算可能方式的数量，这种做法要么冗长无聊，要么根本就做不到。帕斯卡真正的成就就在于此：他提出一种普适而系统性的计数方法，使我们可以通过公式计算或读取图表数据的方式，得到这类问题的答案。这个方法的根基是一种奇特的三角形数字排列。

1-3『妙哉妙哉，看到「帕斯卡三角形」了，之前在书籍「2021083概率论导引」里看到，认识到其在概率论里十分重要。这里重温，而且是从另一个角度来看，作者的解释太通俗了，太有感觉了。（2021-02-19）』

作为帕斯卡工作核心的这个计算方法，其实在 1050 年前后，就已经被中国数学家贾宪发现了。1303 年，另一位中国数学家朱世杰将其发表。卡尔达诺在 1570 年同样就这个问题进行了讨论。但帕斯卡将它整合到更大的概率理论的整体框架中，因此这个方法大部分都归功于他。不过这些前人已有的成果并没有让帕斯卡感到不安。「别说我做的事情里什么新东西都没有，」帕斯卡在自传中争辩道，「这些数字的排列方式就是新的。打网球时，我们打的都是同一个球，但总有人能击出更好的落点。」图 4-1 所示的这个帕斯卡发明的图形因此被称为帕斯卡三角形。在图中，我将帕斯卡三角形截止在第十行上，但这个三角形可以向下方无限延伸。实际上，要扩展这个三角形的做法很简单：除了处在顶端的 1 之外，三角形中的每一个数，都是它左上方与右上方数字之和（如果这两个位置上没有数字，就以 0 代替）。

图 4-1 帕斯卡三角形

如果你想知道从某物体的集合中取出若干的取法有多少种，这时帕斯卡三角形就是一个非常有用的工具。在婚礼宾客问题中，我们可以这样做：要计算从 100 位宾客中挑出 10 位有多少种不同的方式，我们先沿着图中左侧的数字一直往下数，直到标有 100 的那一行为止。这里的三角形并没有画那么多行，不过我们姑且假装它画到了。第 100 行的第一个数字，是从 100 名宾客中挑出 0 位的挑选方式的数量，当然，这样的方式只有一种：谁都不选。这个答案对于任意数目的宾客同样正确，正因为如此，每行的第一个数字都是 1。第 100 行的第二个数字，则是从 100 名宾客中挑出一位的挑选方式的数量，而这样的方式有 100 种：你可以仅仅挑宾客 1 号，或仅仅挑宾客 2 号，等等。这个推理同样适用于每一行，因此每行的第二个数字都简单地等于该行的序号。该行中的第三个数字，表示从 100 名宾客中挑出不同的两位的挑选方式的数量，其余以此类推。因此，我们要找的答案 —— 选出 10 名不同宾客的挑选方式的数量 —— 就是第 100 行的第 11 个数字。不过，即使我们真把帕斯卡三角形画得包含了第 100 行，这个数字也大得无法在一页纸上被完整地写出来。实际上，如果真有来宾抱怨座位安排，你可以告诉他，要考虑到每一种可能的情况，需要足够长的时间。假设对每种情况需要花 1 秒钟来考虑，那么得用 10 万亿年才能把所有的可能情况都考虑到。当然，这位满心不快的客人肯定会认为你在装腔作势。

为了能使用我们这里画出的帕斯卡三角形，现在假设宾客名单中就只有 10 个人。这时，我们的问题需要使用的，就是所给帕斯卡三角形中最底下标着 10 的那一行。行中的数字表示 10 位宾客中的 0 位、1 位、2 位…… 宾客的不同座席安排方式的数量。你也许看出来了，这些数字在前面那个 6 年级测验的例子中也出现过 —— 在 10 道判断题测验中，学生做错若干道题目的可能方式的数量，就等于从 10 名宾客中挑选若干名来安排座位的可能方式的数量。帕斯卡三角形之所以如此有力，原因之一就是，同样的数学方法可以用于许多不同的场合。至于洋基队对勇士队的世界职业棒球锦标赛的例子，我们原来只是乏味地数出了剩余 5 场比赛的所有可能结果，而现在，我们可以直接从三角形中得到洋基队获得 0 场、1 场、2 场、3 场、4 场或 5 场比赛的可能方式的数量：

```
1 5 10 10 5 1
```

从这行数字可以一眼看出，洋基队获得两场胜利的可能性（10 种方式）是获得一场胜利的可能性（5 种方式）的两倍。

一旦掌握了这种方法，我们就会发现，帕斯卡三角形的应用可谓无所不在。我的一位朋友曾为一个刚开始创业的计算机游戏公司工作。她常常跟我说，尽管市场部主任承认小规模的小组座谈会只适合提供「仅仅是定性的结论」，但主任仍然时不时地说参会者达成了 4 比 2 或 5 比 1 的「压倒性」意见，好像这样的数据真有多少意义似的。假设你自己组织一个座谈会，6 名参会者将审查一个还在开发中的新产品，并提出意见。如果实际上有半数人喜欢该产品，那么这个座谈会能以怎样的精确度反映这一真实的喜好呢？这个问题需要用到帕斯卡三角形中标着 6 的那一行，它表明了所有可能的包括 0 人、1 人、2 人、3 人、4 人、5 人或 6 人「小小组」的组成方式数量，这些「小小组」对产品一致表示喜欢（或不喜欢）：

```
1 6 15 20 15 6 1
```

从这些数字可以看出，有 20 种情况，小组成员会分为一半对一半的两群人，一群人喜欢该产品，而另一群人不喜欢。这种情况精确地反映了人们对新产品的真实态度。但除此之外，同样还有 `1+6+15+15+6+1 = 44` 种其他方式，它们给出的或喜欢或不喜欢的一致性意见，实际上并非完全真实的喜好表现。因此，如果不慎重的话，被会议结论误导的概率就是 44/64，或约 2/3。我们举这个例子并非要说会议的共识完全由随机因素造成，我们只是说不能假定这个共识具有显著性。

事后的发展证明，帕斯卡和费马的分析是通往一个自洽的随机性理论的第一大步。他们那著名通信的最后一封信写于 1654 年 10 月 27 日。几周后，帕斯卡精神恍惚地坐了两个钟头。有些人称这种恍惚为一种神秘的体验，其他人则悲叹他最终还是心智失常了。但无论如何，帕斯卡之后完全变成了另一个人。这个改变将带来他在随机性概念上的另一个奠基性贡献。

在 1662 年帕斯卡去世的几天后，仆人发现他的一件夹克上很奇怪地鼓起一块。仆人扯开了夹克内衬，在里面找到几张折起来的羊皮纸和普通纸张。显然，帕斯卡在生命的最后 8 年中，每天都把它们带在身边。这些纸上，是他的潦草笔迹写就的一系列不连贯的词语和词组，标注日期为 1654 年 11 月 23 日。这些文字就是他对那两小时的恍惚做出的说明，其中他描述了上帝如何降临到他面前，并在那两小时内将他从堕落的生活方式中解救出来。

这次启示之后，帕斯卡与大多数他称为「可怕的联系」的朋友断绝了往来。他卖掉了马车、马、家具、藏书 —— 除了《圣经》之外的所有东西。他将钱财施舍给穷人，只给自己留了很少的一点儿，以至他不得不靠乞讨或借债才能果腹。他系着一条内有尖刺的铁腰带，以此让自己总是处于不适之中，而一旦发现自己有高兴起来的危险，他就会将尖刺刺入自己的身体。他结束了数学与科学方面的研究。对于儿时对几何的迷恋，他写道：「我差不多都记不起世界上还有几何这么回事了。我现在认识到几何是如此无用…… 我很可能连想都不会再想它了。」

但帕斯卡仍然多产。在恍惚过后的岁月里，他记下了自己对上帝、宗教和生命的思索。这些思索后来被整理成一本名为《思想录》的书出版了，时至今日仍不时被重印。尽管帕斯卡对数学大加抨击，但他是通过一个数学推导才看透入世生活的轻浮无益的，而在这个推导中，他的概率分析武器得以小试锋芒，用在了一个神学问题上。这个推导就是他做出的另一个贡献，其重要性不亚于他早期在点数问题上所获的成就。

《思想录》中的数学内容被概括在手稿中的两张纸上。这两张纸的正反面都东倒西歪地写满了字，到处都是删改与更正的痕迹。在纸上，帕斯卡详细分析了人对上帝尽责的好处与坏处，就如同用数学求解所下赌注是否明智一般。他那了不起的创新，就是用来计算这些好处与坏处的总结果的方法，也就是今天被称为数学期望的概念。

1-3『帕斯卡对信不信上帝这个问题的解答，很多很多地方看到过。（2021-02-19）』

帕斯卡的论述是这样的：如果首先承认我们不知道上帝是否存在，那么不管存在还是不存在，我们都分别给这两种可能以 50% 的概率。如果我们现在面临着抉择，确定自己今后是否要过一种虔诚的生活，那么我们应该给这两个概率分别赋以怎样的权重呢？帕斯卡认为，如果我们言行虔诚，而上帝又确实存在，那么我们将得到永恒的快乐，其价值为无穷大；另一方面，如果上帝不存在，那么我们所损失的东西或负回报，也不过就是这些虔诚被白白浪费了。帕斯卡接着指出，为了将这些得失归总，我们应该把每种可能结果的概率与其对应的回报相乘，之后再把结果相加，从而得到一种平均或期望的获利。换言之，与我们的虔诚所对应的期望回报，就是无穷大的一半（上帝存在时你的收获），再减去某个小数字的一半（上帝不存在时你的损失）。帕斯卡已经知道足够多关于无穷大的知识，因此他知道无穷大的一半仍然是无穷大，而虔诚的期望回报就是正的无穷大。他由此得出结论：任何一个有理性的人，都应该遵从上帝的律法。这个论证如今被称为帕斯卡赌注。

期望是一个十分重要的概念，不仅在赌博中如此，在所有决策中均如此。事实上，帕斯卡赌注常被认为是博弈论 —— 关于博弈中最优策略的定量研究 —— 这门数学分支诞生的标志。我必须承认，这种思考问题的方式让人上瘾，以至有时我把它用得过了头。「那个停车计时器这次要扣我多少钱？」我问儿子。计时器显示是 25 美分。没错，不过我每 20 次左右就有一次会停车超时，而这时就能看到车上放着一张 40 美元的罚单。因此我是这样解读的：这个 25 美分的计时器费用只是个残酷的诱惑，而实际开销是 2.25 美元（这额外的 2 美元，便是我那 20 次中就有一次的超时概率乘以 40 美元的罚款所产生的费用）。「那么我们这条车道的情况又如何？」我问儿子，「它是收费公路吗？」嗯，我们已经在现在的房子里住了 5 年，粗略算来，我沿着这条车道回家，也有大概 2400 次了，其中有 3 次被伸出的栅栏柱撞断了后视镜，每次都花了我 400 美元。因此我儿子告诉我，这就相当于在路上放一个收费箱，每次我回来时，就得扔 50 美分进去。通过这个例子，他完全理解了期望这个概念（他还建议我，在送他们去学校之前，记得喝杯早咖啡提提神）。

通过数学期望的透镜来看这个世界，我们常常会得出令人惊讶的结果。比如最近有一个通过邮件进行的抽奖，大奖是 500 万美元。只需要寄出一封信，就能参与抽奖并有机会赢得大奖。参与次数没有限制，但一封信只能算一次参与。抽奖的赞助者显然希望能有约 2 亿人次参加，因为本次活动晦涩难懂的条款指出，获胜机会是两亿分之一。那么，参与这样的「免费抽奖」值不值得呢？将获胜的机会乘以它的回报，我们可以求得每次参与的回报大概是 1/40 美元，或者 2.5 美分 —— 远低于所付的邮费。事实上，这场竞赛的大赢家是邮局，而如果关于参与次数的估计是准确的，邮局将因此赚取近 8000 万美元的邮资。

下面是另一个疯狂的游戏。假设加利福尼亚州向它的公民提出如下提议：每名游戏参与者需要支付 1 美元或 2 美元，其中绝大多数人什么都得不到，但某人将得到一笔财富，同时还有一个人会以惨烈的方式被处死。会不会有人参与这个游戏呢？有。不但有，参与者还十分踊跃。这个游戏的名字就叫加州彩票。尽管该州的宣传并没有用我的措辞，但这个彩票带来的后果事实上就是如此。在每次抽奖中，每个获得大奖的幸运儿身后，都有数百万其他竞争者驾车往返于彩票发行点购买彩票，而其中就有一些人会在路上死于交通事故。根据美国国家公路交通安全管理局的统计，并对每个人的驾驶路程、他 / 她购买的彩票张数，以及有多少人卷入了常见的交通事故这些方面做出一些假设后，我们发现，这个死亡率的合理估计值差不多就是 1 人 / 次抽奖。

各州政府都倾向于忽视彩票的潜在不良后果方面的争论。很大程度上，这是由于它们对数学期望有着充分的了解。根据这些了解，它们可以通过一定的设计，使得彩民所购的每张彩票的期望回报 —— 总奖金额除以售出彩票的张数 —— 总小于彩票的价格。通常而言，这笔可观的差额就进入了州政府金库的保险箱中。但 1992 年，澳大利亚墨尔本的一些投资人发现，弗吉尼亚州的彩票竟然违反了上面的原则。该州的彩票是从 1 到 44 中挑出 6 个数字，并以此决定中奖者。如果能找到一个足够大的帕斯卡三角形，就可以发现，从 44 个数字中挑出 6 个来，不同的方式有 7059052 种。彩票的奖金池中有 2700 万美元，而如果把二等、三等和四等奖都算进来，总奖金额就上升为 27918561 美元。这些聪明的澳大利亚投资人进一步算出，如果他们对所有可能的 7059052 种组合的每一个都下一注，那么彩票总价值应等于奖金额，即每张彩票应值 2790 万美元除以 7059052，或者约 3.95 美元。而弗吉尼亚州的决策者定出的彩票价格是多少呢？照例是 1 美元。

这些澳大利亚投资人很快就在本国和新西兰、欧洲及美国找到 2500 个平均愿意出资 3000 美元的小投资者。如果计划成功，这笔 3000 美元的投资将带来 10800 美元的回报。计划还有一些风险。其一，由于他们不是唯一的彩票购买者，因此，可能另有一名甚至不止一名彩民也会买中中奖号码，这就意味着他们将不得不与人分享奖金。在已举办的 170 次抽奖中，有 120 次是无人获奖，一人获奖的不过是 40 次，而两人获奖的仅有 10 次。如果这些数据反映了各种获奖情况的真实概率，就表明投资者有 120/170 的机会独享奖金，有 40/170 的机会得到一半奖金，有 10/170 的机会只获得 1/3 的奖金。通过帕斯卡的数学期望原理重新计算，可知期望奖金额为（120/170×2790 万美元）+（40/170×1395 万美元）+（10/170×697.5 万美元）= 2340 万美元，对应于每张彩票 3.31 美元。相对于 1 美元的彩票价格，即使除去其他开支，这也能获得巨大的回报。

还有另一个危险：要赶在最后时限前完成所有彩票的购买，这可是一场后勤噩梦。这将花费相当一部分投资，而且没有明显的奖金回报。

投资团成员进行了周密准备。他们按规则要求手工填写了 140 万张彩票，每张彩票可抽奖 5 次。他们将一批批购买者安排到 125 个彩票零售点，并说服许多杂货铺参与合作，这些杂货铺从售出的每张彩票中获得一定的利润。方案于最后时限前 72 小时启动。杂货铺的售货员轮班工作，以便卖出尽可能多的彩票。有一个铺子在最后 48 小时卖出了 7.5 万张彩票；一家连锁店则收到足够购买 240 万张彩票的支票，它将打印彩票的工作分配给各个加盟店，还雇用了快递收集这些彩票。即便如此，投资团最终也没能在规定时间完成计划：他们仅仅买了 7059052 张彩票中的 500 万张。

获奖彩票公布后的几天里无人领奖。投资团中奖了，不过他们把这几天都花在寻找中奖彩票上。当州彩票官员发现投资团的所作所为后，他们终止了奖金的支付。紧随其后的是为时一个月的司法争吵，之后这些官员终于明白了，他们没有合理理由取消投资团的奖金。最终，他们支付了这笔奖金。

帕斯卡为随机性研究贡献了计数方法和数学期望的概念。尽管他与数学断绝了往来，但如果身体还能撑得住，那么谁知道他还会发现些什么呢？不过他最终还是撑不住了。1662 年 7 月，帕斯卡身患重病。医生开出常用的处方：放血，并使用烈性泻药、灌肠剂和催吐剂。有那么一阵子，他的状况有所好转，但之后，病魔卷土重来，这次伴随着更严重的头痛、晕眩与痉挛。帕斯卡发誓说，如果他能活下来，就将生命奉献给帮助穷苦人的工作。他还要求把自己转移到一所收治得了不治之症患者的医院，以便死时不会孤单。几天后，1662 年 8 月，帕斯卡去世了，享年 39 岁。尸体解剖发现，他的死因是脑出血，此外还有那些折磨了他一生的病痛对肝脏、胃部和肠道造成的损害。