## 记忆时间

0901 Illusions of Patterns and Patterns of Illusion

1001 The Drunkard's Walk

## 目录

## 0901. Illusions of Patterns and Patterns of Illusion

IN 1848 TWO TEENAGE GIRLS, Margaret and Kate Fox, heard unexplained noises, like knocking or the moving of furniture. Their house, it happened, had a reputation for being haunted. As the story goes,1 Kate challenged the source of the noises to repeat the snap of her fingers and to rap out her age. It rose to both challenges. Over the next few days, with their mother's and some neighbors' assistance, the sisters worked out a code with which they could communicate with the rapper (no pun intended). They concluded that the rapping originated with the spirit of a peddler who had been murdered years earlier in the home they now occupied. With that, modern spiritualism  —  the belief that the dead can communicate with the living  —  was born. By the early 1850s a particular type of spiritual contact, called table rapping, and its cousins, table moving and table turning, had become the rage in the United States and Europe. The enterprise consisted of a group of individuals arranging themselves around a table, resting their hands upon it, and waiting. In table rapping, after some time passed, a rap would be heard. In table moving and table turning, after time passed, the table would begin to tilt or move about, sometimes dragging the sitters along with it. One pictures serious bearded men with jackets reaching their midthigh and ardent women in hoop skirts, eyes wide in wonder as their hands followed the table this way or that.

Table moving became so popular that in the summer of 1853 scientists began to look into it. One group of physicians noted that during the silent sitting period a kind of unconscious consensus seemed to form about the direction in which the table would move.2 They found that when they diverted the sitters' attention so that a common expectation could not form, the table did not move. In another trial they managed to create a condition in which half the sitters expected the table to move to the left and half expected it to move to the right, and again it did not move. They concluded that「the motion was due to muscular action, mostly exercised unconsciously.」But the definitive investigation was performed by the physicist Michael Faraday, one of the founders of electromagnetic theory, inventor of the electric motor, and one of the greatest experimental scientists in history.3 Faraday first discovered that the phenomenon would occur even with just one subject sitting at the table. Then, enrolling subjects who were both「very honorable」and accomplished table movers, he conducted a series of ingenious and intricate experiments proving that the movement of the sitters' hands preceded that of the table. Further, he designed an indicator that alerted the subjects in real time whenever that was occurring. He found that「as soon as the…[indicator] is placed before the most earnest [subject]…the power [of the illusion] is gone; and this only because the parties are made conscious of what they are really doing.」4

Faraday concluded, as the doctors had, that the sitters were unconsciously pulling and pushing the table. The movement probably began as random fidgeting. Then at some point the sitters perceived in the randomness a pattern. That pattern precipitated a self-fulfilling expectation as the subjects' hands followed the imagined leadership of the table. The value of his indicator, Faraday wrote, was thus「the corrective power it possesses over the mind of the table-turner.」5 Human perception, Faraday recognized, is not a direct consequence of reality but rather an act of imagination.6

Perception requires imagination because the data people encounter in their lives are never complete and always equivocal. For example, most people consider that the greatest evidence of an event one can obtain is to see it with their own eyes, and in a court of law little is held in more esteem than eyewitness testimony. Yet if you asked to display for a court a video of the same quality as the unprocessed data captured on the retina of a human eye, the judge might wonder what you were trying to put over. For one thing, the view will have a blind spot where the optic nerve attaches to the retina. Moreover, the only part of our field of vision with good resolution is a narrow area of about 1 degree of visual angle around the retina's center, an area the width of our thumb as it looks when held at arm's length. Outside that region, resolution drops off sharply. To compensate, we constantly move our eyes to bring the sharper region to bear on different portions of the scene we wish to observe. And so the pattern of raw data sent to the brain is a shaky, badly pixilated picture with a hole in it. Fortunately the brain processes the data, combining the input from both eyes, filling in gaps on the assumption that the visual properties of neighboring locations are similar and interpolating.7 The result  —  at least until age, injury, disease, or an excess of mai tais takes its toll  —  is a happy human being suffering from the compelling illusion that his or her vision is sharp and clear.

We also use our imagination and take shortcuts to fill gaps in patterns of nonvisual data. As with visual input, we draw conclusions and make judgments based on uncertain and incomplete information, and we conclude, when we are done analyzing the patterns, that our「picture」is clear and accurate. But is it?

Scientists have moved to protect themselves from identifying false patterns by developing methods of statistical analysis to decide whether a set of observations provides good support for a hypothesis or whether, on the contrary, the apparent support is probably due to chance. For example, when physicists seek to determine whether the data from a supercollider is significant, they don't eyeball their graphs, looking for bumps that rise above the noise; they apply mathematical techniques. One such technique, significance testing, was developed in the 1920s by R. A. Fisher, one of the greatest statisticians of the twentieth century (a man also known for his uncontrollable temper and for a feud with his fellow statistics pioneer Karl Pearson that was so bitter he continued to attack his nemesis long after Pearson's death, in 1936).

To illustrate Fisher's ideas, suppose that a student in a research study on extrasensory perception predicts the result of some coin tosses. If in our observations we find that she is almost always right, we might hypothesize that she is somehow skilled at it, for instance, through psychic powers. On the other hand, if she is right about half the time, the data support the hypothesis that she was just guessing. But what if the data fall somewhere in between or if there isn't much data? Where do we draw the line between accepting and rejecting the competing hypotheses? This is what significance testing does: it is a formal procedure for calculating the probability of our having observed what we observed if the hypothesis we are testing is true. If the probability is low, we reject the hypothesis. If it is high, we accept it.

For example, suppose we are skeptics and hypothesize that the student cannot accurately predict the results of coin tosses. And suppose that in an experimental trial she predicts the coin tosses correctly in a certain number of cases. Then the methods we analyzed in chapter 4 allow us to calculate the probability that she could have accomplished the predictions by chance alone. If she had guessed the coin-toss results correctly so often that, say, the probability of her being that successful by chance alone is only 3 percent, then we would reject the hypothesis that she was guessing. In the jargon of significance testing, we would say the significance level of our rejection is 3 percent, meaning that the chances are at most 3 percent that by chance the data has led us astray. A 3 percent level of significance is fairly impressive, and so the media might report the feat as new evidence of the existence of psychic powers. Still, those of us who don't believe in psychic powers might remain skeptical.

This example illustrates an important point: even with data significant at, say, the 3 percent level, if you test 100 nonpsychic people for psychic abilities  —  or 100 ineffective drugs for their effectiveness  —  you ought to expect a few people to show up as psychic or a few ineffective drugs to show up as effective. That's one reason political polls or medical studies, especially small ones, sometimes contradict earlier polls or studies. Still, significance testing and other statistical methods serve scientists well, especially when they can conduct large-scale controlled studies. But in everyday life we don't conduct such studies, nor do we intuitively apply statistical analysis. Instead, we rely on gut instinct. When my Viking stove turned out to be a lemon and by chance an acquaintance told me she'd had the same experience, I started telling my friends to avoid the brand. When the flight attendants on several United Airlines flights seemed grumpier than those on other airlines I'd recently flown with, I started avoiding United's flights. Not a lot of data there, but my gut instinct identified patterns.

Sometimes those patterns are meaningful. Sometimes they are not. In either case, the fact that our perception of the patterns of life is both highly convincing and highly subjective has profound implications. It implies a kind of relativity, a situation in which, as Faraday found, reality is in the eye of the beholder. For example, in 2006 The New England Journal of Medicine published a `$`12.5 million study of patients with documented osteoarthritis of the knee. The study showed that a combination of the nutritional supplements glucosamine and chondroitin is no more effective in relieving arthritis pain than a placebo. Still, one eminent doctor had a hard time letting go of his feeling that the supplements were effective and ended his analysis of the study on a national radio program by reaffirming the possible benefit of the treatment, remarking that,「One of my wife's doctors has a cat and she says that this cat cannot get up in the morning without a little dose of glucosamine and chondroitin sulfate.」8

When we look closely, we find that many of the assumptions of modern society are based, as table moving is, on shared illusions. Whereas chapter 8 is concerned with the surprising regularities exhibited by random events, in what follows, I shall approach the issue from the opposite direction and examine how events whose patterns appear to have a definite cause may actually be the product of chance.

IT IS HUMAN NATURE to look for patterns and to assign them meaning when we find them. Kahneman and Tversky analyzed many of the shortcuts we employ in assessing patterns in data and in making judgments in the face of uncertainty. They dubbed those shortcuts heuristics. In general, heuristics are useful, but just as our manner of processing optical information sometimes leads to optical illusions, so heuristics sometimes lead to systematic error. Kahneman and Tversky called such errors biases. We all use heuristics, and we all suffer from biases. But although optical illusions seldom have much relevance in our everyday world, cognitive biases play an important role in human decision making. And so in the late twentieth century a movement sprang up to study how randomness is perceived by the human mind. Researchers concluded that「people have a very poor conception of randomness; they do not recognize it when they see it and they cannot produce it when they try,」9 and what's worse, we routinely misjudge the role of chance in our lives and make decisions that are demonstrably misaligned with our own best interests.10

Imagine a sequence of events. The events might be quarterly earnings or a string of good or bad dates set up through an Internet dating service. In each case the longer the sequence, or the more sequences you look at, the greater the probability that you'll find every pattern imaginable  —  purely by chance. As a result, a string of good or bad quarters, or dates, need not have any「cause」at all. The point was rather starkly illustrated by the mathematician George Spencer-Brown, who wrote that in a random series of 101,000,007 zeroes and ones, you should expect at least 10 nonoverlapping subsequences of 1 million consecutive zeros.11 Imagine the poor fellow who bumps into one of those strings when attempting to use the random numbers for some scientific purpose. His software generates 5 zeros in a row, then 10, then 20, 1,000, 10,000, 100,000, 500,000. Would he be wrong to send back the program and ask for a refund? And how would a scientist react upon flipping open a newly purchased book of random digits only to find that all the digits are zeros? Spencer-Brown's point was that there is a difference between a process being random and the product of that process appearing to be random. Apple ran into that issue with the random shuffling method it initially employed in its iPod music players: true randomness sometimes produces repetition, but when users heard the same song or songs by the same artist played back-to-back, they believed the shuffling wasn't random. And so the company made the feature「less random to make it feel more random,」said Apple founder Steve Jobs.12

One of the earliest speculations about the perception of random patterns came from the philosopher Hans Reichenbach, who remarked in 1934 that people untrained in probability would have difficulty recognizing a random series of events.13 Consider the following printout, representing the results of a sequence of 200 tosses of a coin, with X representing tails and O representing heads: ooooxxxxoooxxxooooxxooxoooxxxooxxoooxxxxoooxooxoxoooooxooxoooooxxooxxxoxxoxoxxxxoooxxooxxoxooxxxooxooxoxoxxoxoooxoxooooxxxxoooxxooxoxxoooxoooxxoxooxxooooxooxxxxooooxxxoooxoooxxxxxxooxxxooxooxoooooxxxx. It is easy to find patterns in the data  —  for instance, the four Os followed by four Xs at the beginning and the run of six Xs toward the end. According to the mathematics of randomness, such runs are to be expected in 200 random tosses. Yet they surprise most people. As a result, when instead of representing coin tosses, strings of Xs and Os represent events that affect our lives, people seek meaningful explanations for the pattern. When a string of Xs represents down days on the stock market, people believe the experts who explain that the market is jittery. When a string of Os represents a run of accomplishments by your favorite sports star, announcers sound convincing when they drone on about the player's「streakiness.」And when, as we saw earlier, the Xs or Os stood for strings of failed films made by Paramount and Columbia Pictures, everyone nodded as the industry rags proclaimed just who did and who did not have a finger on the pulse of the worldwide movie audience.

Academics and writers have devoted much effort to studying patterns of random success in the financial markets. There is much evidence, for instance, that the performance of stocks is random  —  or so close to being random that in the absence of insider information and in the presence of a cost to make trades or manage your portfolio, you can't profit from any deviations from randomness.14 Nevertheless, Wall Street has a long tradition of guru analysts, and the average analyst's salary, at the end of the 1990s, was about `$`3 million.15 How do those analysts do? According to a 1995 study, the eight to twelve most highly paid「Wall Street superstars」invited by Barron's to make market recommendations at its annual roundtable merely matched the average market return.16 Studies in 1987 and 1997 found that stocks recommended by the prognosticators on the television show Wall `$`treet Week did much worse, lagging far behind the market.17 And in a study of 153 newsletters, a researcher at the Harvard Institute of Economic Research found「no significant evidence of stock-picking ability.」18

By chance alone, some analysts and mutual funds will always exhibit impressive patterns of success. And though many studies show that these past market successes are not good indicators of future success  —  that is, that the successes were largely just luck  —  most people feel that the recommendations of their stockbrokers or the expertise of those running mutual funds are worth paying for. Many people, even intelligent investors, therefore buy funds that charge exorbitant management fees. In fact, when a group of savvy students from the Wharton business school were given a hypothetical `$`10,000 and prospectuses describing four index funds, each composed in order to mirror the S&P 500, the students overwhelmingly failed to choose the funds with the lowest fees.19 Since paying even an extra 1 percent per year in fees could, over the years, diminish your retirement fund by as much as one-third or even one-half, the savvy students didn't exhibit very savvy behavior.

Of course, as Spencer-Brown's example illustrates, if you look long enough, you're bound to find someone who, through sheer luck, really has made startlingly successful predictions. For those who prefer real-world examples to mathematical scenarios involving 101,000,007 random digits, consider the case of the columnist Leonard Koppett.20 In 1978, Koppett revealed a system that he claimed could determine, by the end of January every year, whether the stock market would go up or down in that calendar year. His system had correctly predicted the market, he said, for the past eleven years.21 Of course, stock-picking systems are easy to identify in hindsight; the true test is whether they will work in the future. Koppett's system passed that test too: judging the market by the Dow Jones Industrial Average, it worked for eleven straight years, from 1979 through 1989, got it wrong in 1990, and was correct again every year until 1998. But although Koppett's predictions were correct for a streak of eighteen out of nineteen years, I feel confident in asserting that his streak involved no skill whatsoever. Why? Because Leonard Koppett was a columnist for Sporting News, and his system was based on the results of the Super Bowl, the championship game of professional football. Whenever the team from the (original) National Football League won, the stock market, he predicted, would rise. Whenever the team from the (original) American Football League won, he predicted, the market would go down. Given that information, few people would argue that Koppett was anything but lucky. Yet had he had different credentials  —  and not revealed his method  —  he could have been hailed as the most clever analyst since Charles H. Dow.

As a counterpoint to Koppett's story, consider now the story of a fellow who does have credentials, a fellow named Bill Miller. For years, Miller maintained a winning streak that, unlike Koppett's, was compared to Joe DiMaggio's fifty-six-game hitting streak and the seventy-four consecutive victories by the Jeopardy! quiz-show champ Ken Jennings. But in at least one respect these comparisons were not very apt: Miller's streak earned him each year more than those other gentlemen's streaks had earned them in their lifetimes. For Bill Miller was the sole portfolio manager of Legg Mason Value Trust Fund, and in each year of his fifteen-year streak his fund beat the portfolio of equity securities that constitute the Standard & Poor's 500.

For his accomplishments, Miller was heralded「the Greatest Money Manager of the 1990s」by Money magazine,「Fund Manager of the Decade」by Morningstar, and one of the top thirty most influential people in investing in 2001, 2003, 2004, 2005, and 2006 by SmartMoney.22 In the fourteenth year of Miller's streak, one analyst was quoted on the CNNMoney Web site as putting the odds of a fourteen-year streak by chance alone at 372,529 to 1 (more on that later).23

Academics call the mistaken impression that a random streak is due to extraordinary performance the hot-hand fallacy. Much of the work on the hot-hand fallacy has been done in the context of sports because in sports, performance is easy to define and measure. Also, the rules of the game are clear and definite, data are plentiful and public, and situations of interest are replicated repeatedly. Not to mention that the subject gives academics a way to attend games and pretend they are working.

Interest in the hot-hand fallacy began around 1985, in particular with a paper by Tversky and his co-workers that was published in the journal Cognitive Psychology.24 In that paper,「The Hot Hand in Basketball: On the Misperception of Random Sequences,」Tversky and his colleagues investigated reams of basketball statistics. The players' talent varied, of course. Some made half their shots, some more, some less. Each player also had occasional hot and cold streaks. The paper's authors asked the question, how do the number and length of the streaks compare with what you would observe if the result of each shot were determined by a random process? That is, how would things have turned out if rather than shooting baskets, the players had tossed coins weighted to reflect their observed shooting percentages? The researchers found that despite the streaks, the floor shots of the Philadelphia 76ers, the free throws of the Boston Celtics, and the experimentally controlled floor shots of the Cornell University men's and women's varsity basketball teams exhibited no evidence of nonrandom behavior.

In particular, one direct indicator of「streakiness」is the conditional probability of success (that is, making a basket) if on the prior attempt the player had achieved success. For a streaky player, the chance of a success on the heels of a prior success should be higher than his or her overall chance of success. But the authors found that for each player a success following a success was just as likely as a success following a failure (that is, a missed basket).

A few years after Tversky's paper appeared, the Nobel Prize–winning physicist E. M. Purcell decided to investigate the nature of streaks in the sport of baseball.25 As I mentioned in chapter 1, he found, in the words of his Harvard colleague Stephen Jay Gould, that except for Joe DiMaggio's fifty-six-game hitting streak,「nothing ever happened in baseball above and beyond the frequency predicted by coin-tossing models.」Not even the twenty-one-game losing streak experienced at the start of the 1988 season by Major League Baseball's Baltimore Orioles. Bad players and teams have longer and more frequent streaks of failure than great players and great teams, and great players and great teams have longer and more frequent streaks of success than lesser players and lesser teams. But that is because their average failure or success rate is higher, and the higher the average rate, the longer and more frequent are the streaks that randomness will produce. To understand these events, you need only to understand the tossing of coins.

What about Bill Miller's streak? That a streak like Miller's could result from a random process may seem less shocking in light of a few other statistics. For instance, in 2004 Miller's fund gained just under 12 percent while the average stock in the S&P gained more than 15 percent.26 It might sound like the S&P trounced Miller that year, but actually he counted 2004 in his「win」column. That is because the S&P 500 is not the simple average of the prices of the stocks it comprises; it is a weighted average in which stocks exert influence proportional to each company's capitalization. Miller's fund did worse than the simple average of S&P stocks but better than that weighted average. Actually, there were more than thirty twelve-month periods during his streak in which he lost to the weighted average, but they weren't calendar years, and the streak was based on the intervals from January 1 to December 31.27 So the streak in a sense was an artificial one to start with, one that by chance was defined in a manner that worked for Miller.

But how can we reconcile these revelations with those 372,529-to-1 odds against him? In discussing Miller's streak in 2003, writers for The Consilient Observer newsletter (published by Credit Suisse–First Boston) said that「no other fund has ever outperformed the market for a dozen consecutive years in the last 40 years.」They raised the question of the probability of a fund's accomplishing that by chance and went on to give three estimates of that probability (the year being 2003, they referred to the chances of a fund's beating the market for only twelve consecutive years): 1 in 4,096, 1 in 477,000, and 1 in 2.2 billion.28 To paraphrase Einstein, if their estimates were correct, they would have needed only one. What were the actual chances? Roughly 3 out of 4, or 75 percent. That's quite a discrepancy, so I'd better explain.

Those who quoted the low odds were right in one sense: if you had singled out Bill Miller in particular at the start of 1991 in particular and calculated the odds that by pure chance the specific person you selected would beat the market for precisely the next fifteen years, then those odds would indeed have been astronomically low. You would have had the same odds against you if you had flipped a coin once a year for fifteen years with the goal of having it land heads up each time. But as in the Roger Maris home run analysis, those are not the relevant odds because there are thousands of mutual fund managers (over 6,000 currently), and there were many fifteen-year periods in which the feat could have been accomplished. So the relevant question is, if thousands of people are tossing coins once a year and have been doing so for decades, what are the chances that one of them, for some fifteen-year period, will toss all heads? That probability is far, far higher than the odds of simply tossing fifteen heads in a row.

To make this explanation concrete, suppose 1,000 fund managers  —  certainly an underestimate  —  had each tossed a coin once a year starting in 1991 (the year Miller began his streak). After the first year about half of them would have tossed heads; after two years about one-quarter of them would have tossed two heads; after the third year one-eighth of them would have tossed three heads; and so on. By then some who had tossed tails would have started to drop out of the game, but that wouldn't affect the analysis because they had already failed. The chances that, after fifteen years, a particular coin tosser would have tossed all heads are then 1 in 32,768. But the chances that someone among the 1,000 who had started tossing coins in 1991 would have tossed all heads are much higher, about 3 percent. Finally, there is no reason to consider only those who started tossing coins in 1991  —  the fund managers could have started in 1990 or 1970 or any other year in the era of modern mutual funds. Since the writers for The Consilient Observer used forty years in their discussion, I calculated the odds that by chance some manager in the last four decades would beat the market each year for some fifteen-year period. That latitude increased the odds again, to the probability I quoted earlier, almost 3 out of 4. So rather than being surprised by Miller's streak, I would say that if no one had achieved a streak like Miller's, you could have legitimately complained that all those highly paid managers were performing worse than they would have by blind chance!

I've cited some examples of the hot-hand fallacy in the context of sports and the financial world. But in all aspects of our lives we encounter streaks and other peculiar patterns of success and failure. Sometimes success predominates, sometimes failure. Either way it is important in our own lives to take the long view and understand that streaks and other patterns that don't appear random can indeed happen by pure chance. It is also important, when assessing others, to recognize that among a large group of people it would be very odd if one of them didn't experience a long streak of successes or failures.

No one credited Leonard Koppett for his lopsided successes, and no one would credit a coin tosser. Many people did credit Bill Miller. In his case, though the type of analysis I performed seems to have escaped many of the observers quoted in the media, it is no news to those who study Wall Street from the academic perspective. For example, the Nobel Prize–winning economist Merton Miller (no relation to Bill) wrote,「If there are 10,000 people looking at the stocks and trying to pick winners, one in 10,000 is going to score, by chance alone, and that's all that's going on. It's a game, it's a chance operation, and people think they are doing something purposeful but they're really not.」29 We must all draw our own conclusions depending on the circumstances, but with an understanding of how randomness operates, at least our conclusions need not be naive.

IN THE PRECEDING I've discussed how we can be fooled by the patterns in random sequences that develop over time. But random patterns in space can be just as misleading. Scientists know that one of the clearest ways to reveal the meaning of data is to display them in some sort of picture or graph. When we see data exhibited in this manner, meaningful relationships that we would likely have missed are often made obvious. The cost is that we also sometimes perceive patterns that in reality have no meaning. Our minds are made that way  —  to assimilate data, fill in gaps, and look for patterns. For example, look at the following arrangement of grayish squares in the figure below.

Photo from Frank H. Durgin,「The Tinkerbell Effect,」Journal of Consciousness Studies 9, nos. 5–6 (May to June 2002)

The image does not literally look like a human being. Yet you can make enough sense of the pattern that if you saw in person the baby pictured, you would probably recognize it. And if you hold this book at arm's length and squint, you might not even perceive the imperfections in the image. Now look at this pattern of Xs and Os:

Here we see rectangular clusters, especially in the corners. I have put them in boldface. If the Xs and Os represented events of interest, we might be tempted to wonder if those clusters signified something. But any meaning we assigned them would be misconceived because these data are identical to the earlier set of 200 random Xs and Os, except for the geometric 5-by-40 arrangement and the choice of which letters to put in boldface.

This very issue drew much attention toward the end of World War II, when V2 rockets started raining down on London. The rockets were terrifying, traveling at over five times the speed of sound, so that one heard them approach only after they had hit. Newspapers soon published maps of the impact sites, which seemed to reveal not random patterns but purposeful clusters. To some observers the clusters indicated a precision in the control of the rockets' flight path that, given the distance the rockets had to travel, suggested that German technology was much more advanced than anyone had dreamed possible. Civilians speculated that the areas spared were home to German spies. Military leaders worried that the Germans could target crucial military sites, with devastating consequences.

In 1946 a mathematical analysis of the bombing data was published in the Journal of the Institute of Actuaries. Its author, R. D. Clarke, divided the area of interest into 576 parcels half a kilometer on each side. Of these, 229 parcels sustained no hits while, despite their minuscule size, 8 parcels had four or five hits. Still, Clarke's analysis showed that, like the coin-toss data above, the overall pattern was consistent with a random distribution.30

Similar issues arise frequently in reports of cancer clusters. If you divide any city or county into parcels and randomly distribute incidents of cancer, some parcels will receive less than average and some more. In fact, according to Raymond Richard Neutra, chief of the Division of Environmental and Occupational Disease Control in California's Department of Health, given a typical cancer registry  —  a database on local rates for dozens of different cancers  —  for California's 5,000 census tracts, you could expect to find 2,750 with statistically significant but random elevations of some form of cancer.31 And if you look at a large enough number of such parcels, you'll find some regions in which cancer occurred at many times the normal rate.

The picture looks even worse if you draw the parcel boundaries after the cancers are distributed. What you get then is called the sharpshooter effect, after the apocryphal fellow who excels in his aim because he shoots at blank paper and draws the target afterward. Unfortunately that is how it usually happens in practice: first some citizens notice neighbors with cancer; then they define the boundaries of the area at issue. Thanks to the availability of data on the Internet, America these days is being scoured for such clusters. Not surprisingly, they are being found. Yet the development of cancer requires successive mutations. That means very long exposure and/or highly concentrated carcinogens. For such clusters of cancer to develop from environmental causes and show themselves in concert and before the victims have moved away from the affected area is quite a long shot. According to Neutra, to produce the kind of cancer clusters epidemiologists are typically called on to investigate, a population would have to be exposed to concentrations of carcinogens that are usually credible only in patients undergoing chemotherapy or in some work settings  —  far greater concentrations than people receive in contaminated neighborhoods and schools. Nevertheless, people resist accepting the explanation that the clusters are random fluctuations, and so each year state departments of health receive thousands of residential cancer-cluster reports, which result in the publication of hundreds of exhaustive analyses, none of which has convincingly identified an underlying environmental cause. Says Alan Bender, an epidemiologist with the Minnesota Department of Health, those studies「are an absolute, total, and complete waste of taxpayer dollars.」32

So far in this chapter we have considered some of the ways in which random patterns can fool us. But psychologists have not contented themselves to merely study and categorize such misperceptions. They have also studied the reasons we fall prey to them. Let's now turn our attention to some of those factors.

PEOPLE LIKE TO EXERCISE CONTROL over their environment, which is why many of the same people who drive a car after consuming half a bottle of scotch will freak out if the airplane they are on experiences minor turbulence. Our desire to control events is not without purpose, for a sense of personal control is integral to our self-concept and sense of self-esteem. In fact, one of the most beneficial things we can do for ourselves is to look for ways to exercise control over our lives  —  or at least to look for ways that help us feel that we do. The psychologist Bruno Bettelheim observed, for instance, that survival in Nazi concentration camps「depended on one's ability to arrange to preserve some areas of independent action, to keep control of some important aspects of one's life despite an environment that seemed overwhelming.」33 Later studies showed that a prior sense of helplessness and lack of control is linked to both stress and the onset of disease. In one study wild rats were suddenly deprived of all control over their environment. They soon stopped struggling to survive and died.34 In another study, in a group of subjects who were told they were going to take a battery of important tests, even the pointless power to control the order of those tests was found to reduce anxiety levels.35

One of the pioneers in the psychology of control is the psychologist and amateur painter Ellen Langer, now a professor at Harvard. Years ago, when she was at Yale, Langer and a collaborator studied the effect of the feeling of control on elderly nursing home patients.36 One group was told they could decide how their rooms would be arranged and were allowed to choose a plant to care for. Another group had their rooms set up for them and a plant chosen and tended to for them. Within weeks the group that exercised control over their environment achieved higher scores on a predesigned measure of well-being. Disturbingly, eighteen months later a follow-up study shocked researchers: the group that was not given control experienced a death rate of 30 percent, whereas the group that was given control experienced a death rate of only 15 percent.37

Why is the human need to be in control relevant to a discussion of random patterns? Because if events are random, we are not in control, and if we are in control of events, they are not random. There is therefore a fundamental clash between our need to feel we are in control and our ability to recognize randomness. That clash is one of the principal reasons we misinterpret random events. In fact, inducing people to mistake luck for skill, or pointless actions for control, is one of the easiest enterprises a research psychologist can engage in. Ask people to control flashing lights by pressing a dummy button, and they will believe they are succeeding even though the lights are flashing at random.38 Show people a circle of lights that flash at random and tell them that by concentrating they can cause the flashing to move in a clockwise direction, and they will astonish themselves with their ability to make it happen. Or have two groups simultaneously compete in a similar enterprise  —  one strives for clockwise motion along the circle, and the other attempts to make the lights travel counterclockwise  —  and the two groups will simultaneously perceive the lights traveling around the circle in the direction of their intention.39

Langer showed again and again how the need to feel in control interferes with the accurate perception of random events. In one of her studies, participants were found to be more confident of success when competing against a nervous, awkward rival than when competing against a confident one even though the card game in which they competed, and hence their probability of succeeding, was determined purely by chance.40 In another study she asked a group of bright and well-educated Yale undergraduates to predict the results of thirty random coin tosses.41 The experimenters secretly manipulated the outcomes so that each student was correct exactly half the time. They also arranged for some of the students to have early streaks of success. After the coin tosses the researchers quizzed the students in order to learn how they assessed their guessing ability. Many answered as if guessing a coin toss were a skill they could cultivate. One quarter reported that their performance would be hampered by distraction. Forty percent felt that their performance would improve with practice. And when asked directly to rate their ability at predicting the tosses, the students who achieved the early streaks of success rated themselves better at the task than did the others even though the number of successes was the same for all the subjects.

In another clever experiment, Langer set up a lottery in which each volunteer received a sports trading card with a player's picture on it.42 A card identical to one of the distributed cards was placed in a bag with the understanding that the participant whose card it matched would be declared the winner. The players were divided into two groups. Those in one group had been allowed to choose their card; those in the other had been handed a card at random. Before the drawing each participant was given the opportunity to sell his or her card. Obviously, whether participants chose their cards or were handed them had no effect on their chances of winning. Yet those who had chosen their own cards demanded more than four times as much money for them as those selling the randomly assigned cards.

The subjects in Langer's experiments「knew,」at least intellectually, that the enterprises in which they were engaging were random. When questioned, for example, none of the participants in the trading-card lottery said they believed that being allowed to choose their card had influenced their probability of winning. Yet they had behaved as if it had. Or as Langer wrote,「While people may pay lip service to the concept of chance, they behave as though chance events are subject to control.」43

In real life the role of randomness is far less obvious than it was in Langer's experiments, and we are much more invested in the outcomes and our ability to influence them. And so in real life it is even more difficult to resist the illusion of control.

One manifestation of that illusion occurs when an organization experiences a period of improvement or failure and then readily attributes it not to the myriad of circumstances constituting the state of the organization as a whole and to luck but to the person at the top. That's especially obvious in sports, where, as I mentioned in the Prologue, if the players have a bad year or two, it is the coach who gets fired. In major corporations, in which operations are large and complex and to a great extent affected by unpredictable market forces, the causal connection between brilliance at the top and company performance is even less direct and the efficacy of reactionary firings is no greater than it is in sports. Researchers at Columbia University and Harvard, for example, recently studied a large number of corporations whose bylaws made them vulnerable to shareholders' demands that they respond to rough periods by changing management.44 They found that in the three years after the firing there was no improvement, on average, in operating performance (a measure of earnings). No matter what the differences in ability among the CEOs, they were swamped by the effect of the uncontrollable elements of the system, just as the differences among musicians might become unapparent in a radio broadcast with sufficient noise and static. Yet in determining compensation, corporate boards of directors often behave as if the CEO is the only one who matters.

Research has shown that the illusion of control over chance events is enhanced in financial, sports, and especially, business situations when the outcome of a chance task is preceded by a period of strategizing (those endless meetings), when performance of the task requires active involvement (those long hours at the office), or when competition is present (this never happens, right?). The first step in battling the illusion of control is to be aware of it. But even then it is difficult, for, as we shall see in the following pages, once we think we see a pattern, we do not easily let go of our perception.

Suppose I tell you that I have made up a rule for the construction of a sequence of three numbers and that the sequence 2, 4, 6 satisfies my rule. Can you guess the rule? A single set of three numbers is not a lot to go on, so let's pretend that if you present me with other sequences of three numbers, I will tell you whether or not they satisfy my rule. Please take a moment to think up some three-number sequences to test  —  the advantage of reading a book over interacting in person is that in the book the author can display infinite patience.

Now that you have pondered your strategy, I can say that if you are like most people, the sequences you present will look something like 4, 6, 8 or 8, 10, 12 or 20, 24, 30. Yes, those sequences obey my rule. So what's the rule? Most people, after presenting a handful of such test cases, will grow confident and conclude that the rule is that the sequence must consist of increasing even numbers. But actually my rule was simply that the series must consist of increasing numbers. The sequence 1, 2, 3, for example, would have fit; there was no need for the numbers to be even. Would the sequences you thought of have revealed this?

When we are in the grasp of an illusion  —  or, for that matter, whenever we have a new idea  —  instead of searching for ways to prove our ideas wrong, we usually attempt to prove them correct. Psychologists call this the confirmation bias, and it presents a major impediment to our ability to break free from the misinterpretation of randomness. In the example above, most people immediately recognize that the sequence consists of increasing even numbers. Then, seeking to confirm their guess, they try out many more sequences of that type. But very few find the answer the fast way  —  through the attempt to falsify their idea by testing a sequence that includes an odd number.45 As philosopher Francis Bacon put it in 1620,「the human understanding, once it has adopted an opinion, collects any instances that confirm it, and though the contrary instances may be more numerous and more weighty, it either does not notice them or else rejects them, in order that this opinion will remain unshaken.」46

To make matters worse, not only do we preferentially seek evidence to confirm our preconceived notions, but we also interpret ambiguous evidence in favor of our ideas. This can be a big problem because data are often ambiguous, so by ignoring some patterns and emphasizing others, our clever brains can reinforce their beliefs even in the absence of convincing data. For instance, if we conclude, based on flimsy evidence, that a new neighbor is unfriendly, then any future actions that might be interpreted in that light stand out in our minds, and those that don't are easily forgotten. Or if we believe in a politician, then when she achieves good results, we credit her, and when she fails, we blame circumstances or the other party, either way reinforcing our initial ideas.

In one study that illustrated the effect rather vividly, researchers gathered a group of undergraduates, some of whom supported the death penalty and some of whom were against it.47 The researchers then provided all the students with the same set of academic studies on the efficacy of capital punishment. Half the studies supported the idea that the death penalty has a deterrent effect; the other half contradicted that idea. The researchers also gave the subjects clues hinting at the weak points in each of the studies. Afterward the undergraduates were asked to rate the quality of the studies individually and whether and how strongly their attitudes about the death penalty were affected by their reading. The participants gave higher ratings to the studies that confirmed their initial point of view even when the studies on both sides had supposedly been carried out by the same method. And in the end, though everyone had read all the same studies, both those who initially supported the death penalty and those who initially opposed it reported that reading the studies had strengthened their beliefs. Rather than convincing anyone, the data polarized the group. Thus even random patterns can be interpreted as compelling evidence if they relate to our preconceived notions.

The confirmation bias has many unfortunate consequences in the real world. When a teacher initially believes that one student is smarter than another, he selectively focuses on evidence that tends to confirm the hypothesis.48 When an employer interviews a prospective candidate, the employer typically forms a quick first impression and spends the rest of the interview seeking information that supports it.49 When counselors in clinical settings are advised ahead of time that an interviewee is combative, they tend to conclude that he is even if the interviewee is no more combative than the average person.50 And when people interpret the behavior of someone who is a member of a minority, they interpret it in the context of preconceived stereotypes.51

The human brain has evolved to be very efficient at pattern recognition, but as the confirmation bias shows, we are focused on finding and confirming patterns rather than minimizing our false conclusions. Yet we needn't be pessimists, for it is possible to overcome our prejudices. It is a start simply to realize that chance events, too, produce patterns. It is another great step if we learn to question our perceptions and our theories. Finally, we should learn to spend as much time looking for evidence that we are wrong as we spend searching for reasons we are correct.

Our journey through randomness is now almost at its end. We began with simple rules and went on to learn how they reflect themselves in complex systems. How great is the role of chance in that most important complex system of all  —  our personal destiny? That's a difficult question, one that has infused much of what we have considered thus far. And though I can't hope to answer it fully, I do hope to shed light on it. My conclusion is evident from the following chapter's title, which is the same as that of this book:「The Drunkard's Walk.」

### Notes

1 See Arthur Conan Doyle, The History of Spiritualism (New York: G. H. Doran, 1926); and R. L. Moore, In Search of White Crows: Spiritualism, Parapsychology, and American Culture (London: Oxford University Press, 1977).

2 Ray Hyman,「Parapsychological Research: A Tutorial Review and Critical Appraisal,」Proceedings of the IEEE 74, no. 6 (June 1986): 823–49.

3 Michael Faraday,「Experimental Investigation of Table-Moving,」Athenaeum, July 2, 1853, pp. 801–3.

4 Michael Faraday, quoted in Hyman,「Parapsychological Research,」p. 826.

5 Faraday, quoted ibid.

6 See Frank H. Durgin,「The Tinkerbell Effect: Motion Perception and Illusion,」Journal of Consciousness Studies 9, nos. 5–6 (May–June 2002): 88–101.

7 Christof Koch, The Quest for Consciousness: A Neurobiological Approach (Englewood, Colo.: Roberts, 2004), pp. 51–54.

8 The study was D. O. Clegg et al.,「Glucosamine, Chondroitin Sulfate, and the Two in Combination for Painful Knee Osteoarthritis,」New England Journal of Medicine 354, no. 8 (February 2006): 795–808. The interview was「Slate's Medical Examiner: Doubts on Supplements,」Day to Day, NPR broadcast, March 13, 2006.

9 See Paul Slovic, Howard Kunreuther, and Gilbert F. White,「Decision Processes, Rationality, and Adjustment to Natural Hazards,」in Natural Hazards: Local, National, and Global, ed. G. F. White (London: Oxford University Press, 1974); see also Willem A. Wagenaar,「Generation of Random Sequences by Human Subjects: A Critical Survey of Literature,」Psychological Bulletin 77, no. 1 (January 1972): 65–72.

10 See Hastie and Dawes, Rational Choice in an Uncertain World, pp. 19–23.

11 George Spencer-Brown, Probability and Scientific Inference (London: Longmans, Green, 1957), pp. 55–56. Actually, 10 is a gross underestimate.

12 Janet Maslin,「His Heart Belongs to (Adorable) iPod,」New York Times, October 19, 2006.

13 Hans Reichenbach, The Theory of Probability, trans. E. Hutton and M. Reichenbach (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1934).

14 The classic text expounding this point of view is Burton G. Malkiel, A Random Walk Down Wall Street, now completely revised in an updated 8th ed. (New York: W. W. Norton, 2003).

15 John R. Nofsinger, Investment Blunders of the Rich and Famous — and What You Can Learn from Them (Upper Saddle River, N.J.: Prentice Hall, Financial Times, 2002), p. 62.

16 Hemang Desai and Prem C. Jain,「An Analysis of the Recommendations of the ‘Superstar' Money Managers at Barron's Annual Roundtable,」Journal of Finance 50, no. 4 (September 1995): 1257–73.

17 Jess Beltz and Robert Jennings,「Wall $treet Week with Louis Rukeyser's Recommendations: Trading Activity and Performance,」Review of Financial Economics 6, no. 1 (1997): 15–27; and Robert A. Pari,「Wall $treet Week Recommendations: Yes or No?」Journal of Portfolio Management 14, no. 1 (1987): 74–76.

18 Andrew Metrick,「Performance Evaluation with Transactions Data: The Stock Selection of Investment Newsletters, Journal of Finance 54, no. 5 (October 1999): 1743–75; and「The Equity Performance of Investment Newsletters」(discussion paper no. 1805, Harvard Institute of Economic Research, Cambridge, Mass., November 1997).

19 James J. Choi, David Laibson, and Brigitte Madrian,「Why Does the Law of One Price Fail? An Experiment on Index Mutual Funds」(working paper no. W12261, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, Mass., May 4, 2006).

20 Leonard Koppett,「Carrying Statistics to Extremes,」Sporting News, February 11, 1978.

21 By some definitions, Koppett's system would be judged to have failed in 1970; by others, to have passed. See CHANCE News 13.04, April 18, 2004–June 7, 2004, http://www.dartmouth.edu/-chance/chance_news/recent_news/chance_news_13.04.htm.

22 As touted on the Legg Mason Capital Management Web site, http://www.leggmasoncapmgmt.com/awards.htm.

23 Lisa Gibbs,「Miller: He Did It Again,」CNNMoney, January 11, 2004, http://money.cnn.com/2004/01/07/funds/ultimateguide_billmiller_0204.

24 Thomas R. Gilovich, Robert Vallone, and Amos Tversky,「The Hot Hand in Basketball: On the Misperception of Random Sequences,」Cognitive Psychology 17, no. 3 (July 1985): 295–314.

25 Purcell's research is discussed in Gould,「The Streak of Streaks.」

26 Mark Hulbert,「Not All Stocks Are Created Equal,」www.MarketWatch.com, January 18, 2005, accessed March 2005 (site now discontinued).

27 Kunal Kapoor,「A Look at Who's Chasing Bill Miller's Streak,」Morningstar, December 30, 2004, http://www.morningstar.com.

28 Michael Mauboussin and Kristen Bartholdson,「On Streaks: Perception, Probability, and Skill,」Consilient Observer (Credit Suisse–First Boston) 2, no. 8 (April 22, 2003).

29 Merton Miller on「Trillion Dollar Bet,」NOVA, PBS broadcast, February 8, 2000.

30 R. D. Clarke,「An Application of the Poisson Distribution,」Journal of the Institute of Actuaries 72 (1946): 48.

31 Atul Gawande,「The Cancer Cluster Myth,」The New Yorker, February 28, 1998, pp. 34–37.

32 Ibid.

33 Bruno Bettelheim,「Individual and Mass Behavior in Extreme Situations,」Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology 38 (1943): 417–52.

34 Curt P. Richter,「On the Phenomenon of Sudden Death in Animals and Man,」Psychosomatic Medicine 19 (1957): 191–98.

35 E. Stotland and A. Blumenthal,「The Reduction of Anxiety as a Result of the Expectation of Making a Choice,」Canadian Review of Psychology 18 (1964): 139–45.

36 Ellen Langer and Judith Rodin,「The Effects of Choice and Enhanced Personal Responsibility for the Aged: A Field Experiment in an Institutional Setting,」Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 34, no. 2 (1976): 191–98.

37 Ellen Langer and Judith Rodin,「Long-Term Effects of a Control-Relevant Intervention with the Institutionalized Aged,」Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 35, no. 12 (1977): 897–902.

38 L. B. Alloy and L. Y. Abramson,「Judgment of Contingency in Depressed and Nondepressed Students: Sadder but Wiser?」Journal of Experimental Psychology: General 108, no. 4 (December 1979): 441–85.

39 Durgin,「The Tinkerbell Effect.」

40 Ellen Langer,「The Illusion of Control,」Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 32, no. 2 (1975): 311–28.

41 Ellen Langer and Jane Roth,「Heads I Win, Tails It's Chance: The Illusion of Control as a Function of Outcomes in a Purely Chance Task,」Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 32, no. 6 (1975): 951–55.

42 Langer,「The Illusion of Control.」

43 Ibid., p. 311.

44 Raymond Fisman, Rakesh Khurana, and Matthew Rhodes-Kropf,「Governance and CEO Turnover: Do Something or Do the Right Thing?」(working paper no. 05-066, Harvard Business School, Cambridge, Mass., April 2005).

45 P. C. Wason,「Reasoning about a Rule,」Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology 20 (1968): 273–81.

46 Francis Bacon, Novum Organon, trans. by P. Urbach and J. Gibson (Chicago: Open Court, 1994), p. 57 (originally published in 1620).

47 Charles G. Lord, Lee Ross, and Mark Lepper,「Biased Assimilation and Attitude Polarization: The Effects of Prior Theories on Subsequently Considered Evidence,」Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 37, no. 11 (1979): 2098–109.

48 Matthew Rabin,「Psychology and Economics」(white paper, University of California, Berkeley, September 28, 1996).

49 E. C. Webster, Decision Making in the Employment Interview (Montreal: Industrial Relations Centre, McGill University, 1964).

50 Beth E. Haverkamp,「Confirmatory Bias in Hypothesis Testing for Client-Identified and Counselor Self-generated Hypotheses,」Journal of Counseling Psychology 40, no. 3 (July 1993): 303–15.

51 David L. Hamilton and Terrence L. Rose,「Illusory Correlation and the Maintenance of Stereotypic Beliefs,」Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 39, no. 5 (1980): 832–45; Galen V. Bodenhausen and Robert S. Wyer,「Effects of Stereotypes on Decision Making and Information-Processing Strategies,」Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 48, no. 2 (1985): 267–82; and C. Stangor and D. N. Ruble,「Strength of Expectancies and Memory for Social Information: What We Remember Depends on How Much We Know,」Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 25, no. 1 (1989): 18–35.

0901模式的错觉与错觉的模式

1848 年，两个十来岁的小女孩玛格丽特和凯特·福克斯，听到了一种无法解释的声音。这声音听起来像有人在敲打或移动家具。而更凑巧的是，她们的住处原本就背着鬼屋的名头。之后 ，凯特向那个声音的来源发起了挑战。她屈着自己的手指关节发出噼啪声，然后让那个声音照着重复一遍，接着又突然让那个怪声说出她的名字。那个奇怪的声音接受了挑战并做出回应。在随后的几天里，在母亲和几个邻居的帮助下，两姐妹找到了一种「密码」与这个敲击者（我可不是故意语带双关）沟通。姐妹俩最终的结论是，这敲击声是一个小贩的鬼魂发出来的，这个小贩几年前在她们现在住的屋子里被人谋杀了。相信死者能与生者沟通交流的现代招魂术伴随着这个故事诞生了。到 19 世纪 50 年代初，被称为「敲桌子」的这种与灵魂接触的方法，以及技出同门的「移桌子」和「翻桌子」在欧美风靡一时。这些通灵方法需要由一群人参与，参与者围坐在桌旁，手放在桌上，然后就是等待。在「敲桌子」方法中，经过一段时间的等待，参与者就会听到一声敲打声；而在「移桌子」和「翻桌子」方法中，桌子会移动或翘起，有时甚至连桌旁的人都一起被拽着跑。有人还画下了当时的场景，在画中，那些表情严肃、穿着下摆拖到大腿中部的夹克的大胡子男人，以及穿着带裙撑的长裙的女性爱好者，当他们的手随着桌子移来移去时，他们的眼睛因惊奇而瞪得老大。

「移桌子」方法一度非常流行，科学家们在 1853 年夏天时，开始觉得有必要对这个通灵方法进行研究。一群医生注意到，在参与者静静坐着的时间里，有一种无意识的共识好像在逐渐成形，最终决定着桌子移动的方向。他们发现，如果通过分散在座者的注意力阻止这个共识形成，桌子就不会移动。在另一项实验中，他们成功地制造出这样一种情况，让一半参与者希望桌子往左移，而另一半参与者希望它往右移，桌子也因而保持静止。他们得出的结论是：「桌子移动的原因是肌肉反应，且主要是通过无意识训练形成的反应。」最终给通灵术这个问题画上句号的，是电磁理论的创始人之一，电机的发明者，历史上最伟大的实验科学家之一，物理学家迈克尔·法拉第的研究。法拉第首先发现，哪怕桌旁只坐了一个人，桌子移动的现象也会发生。然后，在招募了「道德高尚」且事业有成的「移桌者」后，他进行了一系列复杂而富有创造性的实验，证明参与者双手的移动发生在桌子移动之前。他进而设计了一个指示器，一旦出现上述双手移动的情况，指示器就立刻向受试者发出警报。他发现，「一旦（指示器）…… 放到甚至是最认真的（受试者）之前……（这种错觉的）力量就消失了。这一情况产生的原因只能是，所有参与者都被迫意识到他们真正在做些什么」。

和那些医生一样，法拉第的结论是，桌子是被这些坐着的参与者无意识地拉动或推动的。这种运动也许是由于不耐烦而随机发生的，然后在某一时刻，参与者们随机运动中感知到某种模式，当参与者的手跟随桌子的这个想象中的移动而移动时，该模式便成为某种自我实现的期望。法拉第继续写道，他设置的那些指示器的价值，就在于「它能够纠正这些移桌者的意识」。法拉第认识到，人类的感知并不是客观实在造成的直接结果，而是人类对这些活动进行想象的产物。

感知需要想象，因为生活中的数据从来都是不完整且模棱两可的。大部分人都会认为亲眼所见的东西比其他证据更可靠，而在法庭上，没有什么比目击者的证言更受尊重的了。但如果在法庭上展示一段视频，视频的成像质量跟我们人类视网膜形成的未经处理的影像数据完全一样，那么法官可能会想，这个家伙是在玩拖延战术吗？因为在这段视频中，首先会有一个盲点，即视觉神经与视网膜的连接点；其次，在整个视野中，唯一具有足够高分辨率的区域，不过是围绕视网膜中心大约 1 度视角的范围，这个范围大致相当于将手臂伸直时我们看到的自己大拇指所对应的宽度。在这个区域之外，分辨率急剧下降。为了补偿这种成像质量下降的缺点，我们需要不停地移动眼球，让那个高成像分辨率区域能扫过我们希望观察的场景。因此总的来说，送往我们大脑的原始视觉数据，是一幅幅晃来晃去、让人头昏脑涨的图像，而且图像里面还有一个洞。幸运的是，大脑会对这些数据进行处理，将双眼传来的输入数据加以组合，并假设相邻位置具有相似的视觉特征，然后用内插值的方法填充图像中的空隙。大脑的这些辛劳带给我们的最终结果，就是一个开开心心的人会盲目地确信他 / 她的视觉既敏锐又清晰，至少在年老、受伤、疾病或过量的 mai tais 鸡尾酒造成严重的视力损伤之前是如此。但这不过是一种错觉。

1-2-3『这里视网膜中心 1 度角的范围，在书籍「脑与阅读」以及「吴军的阅读课专栏」里都有提及，吴军是给了具体的 1 度角数据，猜测他的书籍就是看本书获取的。做一张信息数据卡片。（2021-03-01）』——已完成

我们还投机取巧地通过想象填补了非视觉数据模式中的空白。如同视觉输入一样，我们依据不确定和不完整的信息得出结论和做出判断，而当我们对那些数据中的模式进行全完分析之后，就能得到一个我们所见的「画面」清晰又准确的结论。但事实果真如此吗？

其实科学家在帮助我们预防发现虚假模式的方向上已经前进了一步。他们建立了统计分析方法，用来判断一组观测值是否可以对某个假设提供足够的支持，还是它们那看起来的支持完全是偶然因素造成的。例如，当物理学家希望确定超级对撞机所得数据的显著性时，他们并不是把所得到的曲线翻来覆去地看了又看，以试图找到从噪声中冒出的波峰，而是使用数学技巧进行判断。显著性检验就是这样一种统计分析方法，它是由 20 世纪最伟大的统计学家之一 —— 费歇尔于 20 世纪 20 年代建立的。（费歇尔还因他那无法控制的火暴脾气而著称，他与同道的统计学先驱皮尔逊长期不和，甚至在 1936 年皮尔逊死后很久，还对这个死对头进行攻击。）

为了说明费歇尔的思路，现在我们来设想一项超感官知觉的研究。在这个研究里，我们让一名学生预测扔硬币的结果。我们发现如果她几乎每次都能正确地预测结果，我们就有理由假设她确实有这方面的超能力，比如她可以通过意念力预测结果。另一方面，如果她只能正确预测差不多一半的结果，这个数据所能支持的假设就是她只不过是在瞎猜。但如果结果落在两者之间，或者根本就没有足够多的数据，那么结论又该如何呢？在接受与拒绝这两个对立的假设时，我们决策的分界线应该画在哪儿呢？这就是显著性检验所做的事情：它是一个形式化的计算方法，能够计算出当所检验的假设为真时，我们观测到实际所得的数据的概率。如果这个概率小，我们就拒绝假设，反之就接受假设。

举例来说，假定我们都是怀疑论者，并且这名学生不能完全准确地预测出扔硬币的结果。我们进一步假设在某次实验中，她正确预测了若干次扔硬币的结果。那么利用第 4 章给出的分析方法，我们可以算出她仅凭运气就能达到这个预测水平的概率是多少。如果她频繁地猜出准确结果，并且我们算出她纯靠运气做到这一点的可能性仅为 3%，我们就应当拒绝她完全是在瞎猜的假设。用显著性检验的术语来说，拒绝该假设的显著性水平为 3%，即由于纯粹偶然性而得出错误判断的可能性最多为 3%。3% 的显著性水平应该算是相当令人印象深刻了，因此媒体以此作为精神力存在的证据，而对学生的这个表现大加报道。但不相信有精神力的人则可能继续持保留态度。

这个例子说明了一个重要的问题：即使数据的显著性达到类似 3% 这样的水平，如果我们对 100 名不具有精神力的人进行精神力测试，或者对 100 种无效药物进行有效性测试，我们也应该预计到，总会有那么几个人表现得好像确实具有精神力，或者总有那么几种无效药物表现得好像确实有效。这就是为什么政治方面的民意调查或医学领域的研究结果，有时会与之前的结果相矛盾，尤其是在数据量较小时。尽管如此，显著性检验与其他统计方法还是为科学家提供了良好的帮助，特别是在大规模的受控研究中。不过，我们平时并不会进行这样的研究，也做不到下意识地用统计分析加以处理。我们进行判断时依靠的是本能。如果我的维京牌炉子有些毛病，而凑巧一个熟人告诉我她也有同样的经历，那么我会告诫朋友们不要再买这个牌子的炉子；如果在乘坐联合航空的班机时，有那么几次，跟我同机的乘客表现得似乎总比最近坐过的其他公司航班的乘客更为乖戾，我就会避免继续乘坐联合航空的班机。在这些情况中，数据量都不大，但我们内在的本能找到了某种模式。

这些模式有时有意义，有时没有。不论是哪种情况，事实都是我们对生活中各种模式的感知既有很强的说服力，又有高度的主观性。这一事实有着深远的影响。它实际上隐含了某种相对性。正如法拉第发现的那样，在某些情况下，现实只存在于相信它存在的人的眼中。比如，2006 年《新英格兰医学期刊》发表了一项耗资 1250 万美元、对膝关节炎登记患者开展的研究。研究表明，过量的葡萄糖胺与软骨素组成的复合营养成分，在减轻关节炎疼痛方面并不比安慰剂更有效。尽管如此，某位著名医生还是难以舍弃这些营养成分确实有效的感觉。因此，他在一个全国性广播节目中重申了该疗法的潜在好处，而且不再对上面那项研究进行讨论。他说的是：「我妻子的一位医生养了只猫，她说如果这只猫不吃一点儿葡萄糖胺加软骨素硫酸盐的话，早上连站都站不起来。」

更仔细些观察我们就能发现，现代社会中的许多假设，就像「移桌子」一样，建立在共享的错觉之上。在第 8 章中，我们关注了随机事件所展现的令人吃惊的规律性。而接下来的内容，我们将从相反的方面进行叙述，即那些似乎具有确定原因的事件模式，其实有可能纯粹是偶然因素的产物。

寻找模式并赋予其意义是人类的天性。卡尼曼和特沃斯基对许多简化方法进行了分析，而我们在评价数据模式以及在不确定性的环境中进行决策时，常常会用到这些简化方法。他们称这些简化方法为「启发式方法」。一般来说，启发式方法十分有用，但正如我们的视觉信息处理方式有时会带来视觉错觉一样，启发式方法有时也会导致系统性错误。卡尼曼和特沃斯基称这种错误为「偏误」。我们都在使用启发式方法，也都受到偏误的影响。不过，在我们的日常体验中，尽管视觉错觉并不常见，但认知偏误在我们的决策中却扮演着重要的角色。因此，20 世纪晚期兴起一股热潮，研究人类思维究竟是如何认知随机性的。研究者的结论是，「人们对于随机性基本没什么概念：他们对随机性视而不见，而当他们想要制造随机性时，也无法做到」。更糟的是，我们总是习惯性地误判机遇在生活中的角色，并总是做出与我们的最大利益并不相符的决定。

设想存在一个事件序列，这些事件可以是季度的盈利，或是通过互联网约会服务获得的一串或好或糟的约会。但不管是什么样的事件，序列的长度越长，或者观察的序列数量越多，越有可能发现任何一种很容易想象到的模式，但这些「模式」完全是碰巧的结果，根本就不需要有什么「原因」带来那一连串盈利或好或糟的季度，或者或好或糟的约会。数学家斯潘塞-布朗向我们充分展示了这一点。他指出，在 10 1000007 个 0 或 1 构成的随机序列中，我们有超过五成的把握，在里面找到至少 10 个互不重叠的、由 100 万个连续的 0 构成的子序列。假设有个可怜的家伙恰巧就掉进这样一个子序列中，那么当他想在科学研究中使用这个随机数序列所产生的随机数时，就会发现程序先是连续蹦出 5 个 0，然后是 10 个，然后是 20 个、1000 个、1 万个、10 万个、50 万个。那么这时他是不是有合理的理由把这个程序退货呢？如果某科学家打开一本新买的关于随机数表的书，却发现所有的数字都是 0，那么他会有怎样的反应呢？斯潘塞-布朗这个例子的关键点在于，一个过程本身是随机的，并不等同于这个过程产生的结果也是随机的。苹果公司最初的 iPod（音乐播放器软件），在随机播放歌曲时就碰到这个问题：真正的随机性有时会造成重复，但使用者如果连着听到同一首歌或同一个人唱的歌，他们就会认为这个歌曲的随机排列实际上并不是随机的。因此，公司修改了软件，让它变得「不那么随机，让人觉得它更加随机」（苹果公司创始人史蒂夫·乔布斯语）。

针对随机模式感知问题最早期的思索之一，出自哲学家汉斯·赖欣巴哈。他在 1934 年写道，未受过概率论训练的人们很难识别出随机事件序列。看看下面这个连扔 200 次硬币得到的结果序列，其中 X 表示反面朝上，而 O 表示正面朝上：

```
OOOOXXXXOOOXXXOOOOXXOOXOOOXXXOOXXOOOXXXXOOOXOOXOXOOOOOXOOXOOOOOXXOOXXXOXXOXOXXXXOOOXXOOXXOXOOXXXOOXOOXOXOXXOXOOOXOXOOOOXXXXOOOXXOOXOXXOOOXOOOXXOXOOXXOOOOXOOXXXXOOOOXXXOOOXOOOXXXXXXOOXXXOOXOOXOOOOOXXXX。
```

我们可以很容易找到数据中的模式，比如一开始跟在 4 个 X 后面的 4 个 O，以及快结束时出现的连续 6 个 X。数学计算告诉我们，这类模式出现在 200 次扔硬币的结果序列中的可能性是很高的，但仍有许多人对这种结果感到吃惊。如果这些 X 和 O 的字符串代表的不是扔硬币的结果，而是会对我们产生实际影响的事情，那么人们会希望为它们找到一个有意义的解释。如果 X 代表股市下跌的日子，那么一连串的 X 会让人们相信那些认为股市即将崩溃的观点；如果一连串的 O 代表的是你最喜爱的运动明星连续获得的好成绩，对这位运动员的「稳定表现」大加赞扬的评论听起来就十分令人信服；而如果像我们之前的例子那样，这些 X 或 O 代表的是派拉蒙或哥伦比亚电影公司的失败作品，电影行业的小报所宣称的某人能够或不能够把握全世界电影观众脉搏的言论就足以让每个人点头称是。

学者和作家们投入了大量精力，研究金融市场中的随机成功案例中的模式。比如，许多证据都表明，股票的表现是随机的，或者它如此接近随机，如果没有内幕消息，或者股票交易或账户管理要收取费用，那么人们根本无法从股票价格的随机波动中得到任何获利。尽管如此，华尔街长期以来却对股票分析大师有着一种不成文的信仰。20 世纪 90 年代末，这些分析师的平均年薪约为 300 万美元。他们做得怎样呢？1995 年的一项研究发现，《巴伦周刊》每年都会邀请 8-12 名薪金最高的「华尔街超级明星」到一个圆桌会议上推荐股票。但实际上这些股票的收益，仅仅和市场的平均回报率相当。1987 年和 1997 年进行的研究表明，预言家们在《华尔街一周》这个电视节目上推荐的股票，表现甚至还要差更多：它们远远落后于市场平均盈利水平。哈佛经济研究所的一名研究人员对 153 条时事通讯进行了分析，发现「并没有显著证据证明分析师们确实具有挑选绩优股的能力」。

哪怕纯粹靠运气，也会有某些分析师或基金能表现出令人印象深刻的成功模式。许多研究都表明，这些市场中以往的成功事例，并不能作为未来继续成功的一个良好指标，也就是说，这些成功很大程度上不过是走运而已。尽管如此，大多数人还是觉得，他们的股票经纪人或基金运营专家提供的建议是值得他们的要价的。包括那些足够聪明的投资者在内的许多人，都因此购买了管理费过高的基金。实际上，有一项实验，实验者给一群来自沃顿商学院的聪明的学生每人提供了 1 万美元的虚拟资金，以及反映了标准普尔 500 指数的 4 只指数型基金的汇总报告。绝大多数学生都未能以最低成本选择基金。由于哪怕仅仅是多付 1% 的年费，也可能让你多年后的退休基金缩减 1/3 甚至 1/2，因此这些聪明学生的表现可一点儿都算不上聪明。

当然，斯潘塞-布朗的例子已经表明，如果我们观察足够长的时间，就肯定会碰到某个家伙，仅仅靠好运也能做出令人称奇的成功预测。相比于包含 10 1000007 个随机数字的数学问题，如果我们更喜欢现实世界中的例子，就来看看专栏作家伦纳德·科佩特吧。1978 年，科佩特公开了一个股市涨跌的预测体系。按他本人的话来说，这种预测方法能够在每年 1 月底确定当年股市的涨跌，对之前的 11 个年头，该方法都正确地给出了当年股市涨跌的结果。当然，事后对股市涨跌进行「预测」，对于股票选择系统而言是很容易的。所以真正的考验在于，这种方法能否预测股市未来的发展。科佩特的这套东西同样通过了后一个考验：以道琼斯指数来衡量，该系统从 1979 年到 1989 年，连续 11 年都做出了正确的预测；1990 年的预测失败了，但从 1991 年到 1998 年，方法再次连续给出正确答案。虽然科佩特在 19 年的预测中命中了 18 次，但我可以很有把握地说，方法的这个稳定表现与什么能力之类的东西根本无关，不管是什么能力。为什么呢？因为科佩特是《体育新闻》的一名专栏作家，而他的方法不过是根据超级碗（职业橄榄球大联盟的年度冠军赛）的比赛结果进行预测。如果在比赛中获胜的是（前）美国国家橄榄球联合会的球队，他就预测股市上涨；而如果获胜的是（前）美国橄榄球联合会的球队，他就预测股市下跌。要是人们知道这个方法是怎么回事，估计没几个人会说科佩特的成绩不是靠运气得来的。但如果他换个身份，而且不公开他的方法，恐怕人们就会向他欢呼致敬，称他是自查尔斯·道以来最聪明的分析师了。

相较于科佩特的故事，现在来看看比尔·米勒这个确实有着正确身份的家伙的故事。不同于科佩特的成就，米勒可是在许多年里一直保持着连胜，这个连胜完全可以与乔·迪马吉奥连续 56 场比赛击球成功，或者肯·詹宁斯在智力问答节目《危险边缘！》（ Jeopardy !）中 74 次连胜的纪录相媲美。不过这也不是非常贴切的对比：米勒在他那些连胜的年头里，一年赚的钱比后两位先生一辈子赚的钱还要多。因为米勒是美盛价值信托基金唯一的投资组合经理，在他 15 年连续成功的投资中，他的基金的表现每年都好过标准普尔 500 指数的股票证券投资组合。

米勒因这个成就被《金钱》杂志誉为「20 世纪 90 年代最伟大的基金经理」，而晨星网则称他为「年代基金经理」，《精明理财》杂志也在 2001 年、2003 年、2004 年、2005 年和 2006 年把他选为对投资最有影响力的 30 人之一。在米勒连胜的第 14 年中，美国有线电视新闻网财经频道曾引用某位分析师的话，称纯粹靠运气获得连续 14 年成功的机会是 1/372529（后面我们会对这个值多说几句）。

这种认为随机序列中出现的重复是某种超优异表现的错误认识，被学术界称为「热手谬误」。大多数针对热手谬误的研究都集中于体育运动领域，因为在体育运动中，我们可以很容易定义和衡量运动员的表现；同时，体育比赛的规则清晰而确定，数据充足而公开，我们感兴趣的重复情况能一再出现，更不用说这类课题还能让这些学者一边观看比赛一边假装工作。

学术界是在 1985 年前后开始对热手谬误产生兴趣的。更具体点儿说，这个领域的研究始于特沃斯基与同事发表在《认知心理学》上的一篇论文。在名为「篮球运动中的热手：论对随机序列的错误感知」的文章中，特沃斯基和同事们研究了大量的篮球比赛统计数据。当然，每名球员的天赋都不同：有的投篮命中率为 50%，有的更多些，有的则更少些；每名球员也都有过一段时间手热或手冷的经历。文章作者考虑的问题是，假设每一次投篮的投中与不中是随机的，那么我们通过随机序列能观察到的手热或手冷时期的次数和长度，跟实际中的次数及长度相比会怎样？也就是说，如果球员们并不是去投篮，而是扔一枚能够反映其命中率的不完美硬币，所得的结果会怎样？研究者发现，尽管存在着连续命中或连续投失的情况，在费城 76 人队的投篮，波士顿凯尔特人队的罚篮，以及受控实验中康奈尔大学男子和女子篮球队的投篮中，我们都找不到任何证据说明这些情况不能由随机序列的行为解释。

对运动员表现「稳定性」的一个具体而直接的衡量标准，就是在上一次投篮成功（即投中一球）的前提下，本次投篮也成功的条件概率。我们认为的这种发挥稳定的球员，他 / 她的这个条件概率应该比他 / 她的总成功率要高。但论文作者发现，对于每名球员，紧跟在一次成功之后的成功，与紧跟在一次失败（即投篮不中）之后的成功，两者的可能性相等。

特沃斯基的论文发表几年后，诺贝尔奖得主、物理学家珀塞尔决定也来研究一下棒球运动中稳定发挥的本质。而他的发现如果用他在哈佛的同事古尔德的话来说，就是除了迪马吉奥连续 56 场都能击中球的这个例外，「在棒球运动中，从来都没有什么事情的发生频率，会超出由扔硬币模型所预测得到的结果」。甚至美国职业棒球大联盟的巴尔的摩金莺队在 1988 赛季一开始时遭遇的 21 连败，也在预测的频率内。相较于更好的球员和球队，更差一些的球员和球队会出现持续时间更久的连续失败，而且出现连败的频率更高；而相较于弱一些的对手，好的球员和球队会出现更长时间的连胜，同时出现连胜的频率也更高。但这是由于他们平均的败率或胜率要高一些。这个平均比率越高，随机产生的连败或连胜就越长且越频繁。我们只需要搞清楚在扔硬币时发生了什么，就能够理解上面的情况。

可是米勒的那个连续 15 年胜过标准普尔的成功又是怎么回事呢？如果我们知道了另外几个统计数字，那么对于米勒的稳定表现仍然是某随机过程产物的这一事实，可能就不会那样震惊了。比如在 2004 年，米勒的基金盈利差一点儿不到 12%，而标准普尔中的股票平均盈利为 15% 多一点儿。这么听起来，在这一年他应该输给了标准普尔。不过实际上，2004 年仍然被归入米勒「获胜」的一栏，因为标准普尔 500 指数不是股票价格的简单平均，而是按各公司资本额对股票加权后的均值。米勒的基金比标准普尔股票的简单平均要差，却比加权平均要好。事实上，在米勒连续成功的那些年中，有 30 多个「连续 12 个月时间段」，他做得还不如标准普尔 500 指数的加权平均好，但这些时间段都不是一个完整的日历年，也就是从 1 月 1 日到 12 月 31 日的区间，而他的连续成功是按日历年计算的。从某种意义上说，他的连续成功从一开始就有虚假的味道，因为这个成功的定义方式正好对他奏效。

但我们的这些新发现，与米勒要获得他的连胜所面对的那个 1/372529 的不利概率，是怎样互不矛盾的呢？在谈论米勒在 2003 年的表现时，为《融会贯通的观察者》（ The Consilient Observer ）内部通讯（由瑞士信贷第一波士顿出版）撰稿的作家们称，「在过去 40 年中，没有其他任何一只基金的表现，能连续 12 年优于市场」。他们在文中提出一个问题：纯靠运气做到这一点的概率是多少？接着，他们给出三个估计值（这一年是 2003 年，而他们考虑的，是一只基金在区区 12 年中连续击败市场的概率）：1/4096，1/477000，以及二十二亿分之一。按爱因斯坦的话来说，如果他们的估计是正确的，只要一个值就够了。所以真正的概率是多少呢？差不多是 3/4，或者 75%。嗯，这个差别实在是有些悬殊，看来我最好解释一下。

那些非常之低的概率值给出的，是在某个意义之下的正确答案：如果你在 1991 年开始时正好挑出了米勒这么个人，而完全出于偶然，这个你挑选的人不多也不少地在接下来的 15 年中表现得比市场更好，那么这个可能性的分母的确是个天文数字。这个概率也等于在 15 年中每年扔一次硬币且每次都扔出正面朝上的概率。但正如我们对马里斯的本垒打进行的分析那样，这个概率并不是与我们现在的问题真正有关的概率，因为除了米勒，还有几千名基金经理（目前有 6000 多名），同时，也有许多个连续 15 年的时间段可以用来完成这一丰功伟业。因此，我们真正要问的问题是，如果现在有几千人，每人每年都扔一次硬币，并且一直这样做了好几十年，那么其中会出现某个人，在这段时间中的某个连续的 15 年内，能够全部扔出正面朝上，这个概率是多少？而这时候的值远大于单纯地连续扔出 15 次正面朝上的概率。

我们解释得更形象点儿。假设有 1000 名（这个数字肯定低估了）基金经理，从 1991 年（米勒开始连胜的那一年）开始，每年都扔一次硬币。第一年，这些人中大约一半会扔出正面朝上；两年后，大概有 1/4 的人会扔出两次正面朝上；三年后，大概有 1/8 的人扔出三次正面朝上，依此类推。那些扔出反面朝上的人逐渐退出了游戏。这并不影响我们的分析，因为他们已经失败了。在 15 年后，某特定的扔硬币者一直扔出正面朝上的概率为 1/32768。但是，从 1991 年开始扔硬币的 1000 人中的某个人能一直扔出正面朝上的概率则大得多，大约为 3%。最后，我们没有理由只考虑那些从 1991 年才开始扔硬币的人，因为这些经理可以从 1990 年或 1970 年或现代基金时代的任意一年起开始扔硬币。既然《融会贯通的观察者》的撰稿人用的是 40 年这个值，我们就来算一算，在过去 40 年中，某个经理能在某个 15 年的时间段内，每年都击败市场的概率。那这个可能性就增加到了之前所给的值，也就是差不多 3/4。因此，与其说我对米勒的连胜感到惊讶，倒不如说要是没有人能够做到这一点，我们就大可以有理有据地嘲笑那些拿着高薪的经理，因为他们的表现实在比瞎碰运气还要糟糕！

到目前为止，我引用的都是体育和金融领域中热手谬误的例子。但是，在生活中的方方面面，我们其实都能碰到连续的成功或失败，或其他特定的成功与失败交织的模式。有时成功是主流，有时失败更多些。但不管碰到的是哪种模式，生活中重要的是我们要将眼光放长远，并理解不管是连续的成功或失败，还是其他看似不随机的模式，其实可能只是纯粹的运气。而在评价他人时同样重要的是，我们应该认识到对一大群人而言，如果没有人经历过长时期的连续成功或失败，就真是一件很奇怪的事了。

没有人会相信科佩特的成功，也没有人会相信一个靠扔硬币来出主意的家伙。但的确有许多人相信米勒。在这个个案中，尽管那些观察家似乎都忘了我的这类分析，但对于从学术角度研究华尔街的人来说，我说的那些根本不是什么新闻。比如，诺贝尔奖获得者、经济学家默顿·米勒（跟比尔·米勒没啥关系）写道：「如果有 1 万个人观察股票市场，并试图挑出最赚钱的那些股票，那么这 1 万人中总有一个能成功，而他所靠的仅仅是运气。所发生的事情不过如此。这只是场游戏，一个随机的操作。人们以为他们是在有目的地做着些什么，但实际并非如此。」每个人都必须根据所处的环境得出自己的结论，但如果你理解了随机性的运作方式，至少你得到的结论不会太过单纯和天真。

之前我们讨论，那些在一段时间内产生的随机序列的模式是如何愚弄我们的。不过空间中的随机模式同样具有误导性。科学家们知道，要揭示数据隐含的意义，最清晰明了的方式被之一，就是将其绘制成某种图像或图形。当数据用这种方式被呈现出来时，那些很可能被忽略的有意义的关系将会变得更明显。但这个做法的代价是，有时我们也会感知到一些实际上没有意义的模式。我们大脑的构造，就是为这种吸收数据、填补空隙、寻找模式的行事方式设计出来的。让我们看看图 9-1 中灰色方块的排列。

图 9-1

注：照片引自 Frank H. Durgin,「The Tinkerbell Effect」, Journal of Consciousness Studies, 9,nos. 5-6（May to June 2002）。

这张图看上去并不像一个真实的人，但我们可以从这个模式中得到足够的信息，根据这些信息，当我们看到图像中那个婴儿本人时，我们很可能认出他来。如果你拿起书，伸直手臂，从旁边一点儿的角度斜看过去，甚至有可能察觉不到图像中的不完美之处。现在，让我们看看下面的 X 和 O 组成的模式：

```
OOOOXXXXOOOXXXOOOOXXOOXOOOXXXOOXXOOOXXXXOOOXOOXOXOOOOOXOOXOOOOOXXOOXXXOXXOXOXXXXOOOXXOOXXOXOOXXXOOXOOXOXOXXOXOOOXOXOOOOXXXXOOOXXOOXOXXOOOXOOOXXOXOOXXOOOOXOOXXXXOOOOXXXOOOXOOOXXXXXXOOXXXOOXOOXOOOOOXXXX
```

其中可以看到一些矩形的相同字符的集合，特别是在角落上。我将它们加粗了。如果这些 X 和 O 代表着我们感兴趣的事件，那么我们可能会思考这些矩形是不是有什么特殊的含义。但给它们赋予的任何意义，都将是对这些数据的一种误读，因为这些数据与早先那 200 个随机的 X 和 O 的序列完全相同，只不过现在按 5 行 40 列排列出来，并选出了某些部分加粗显示而已。

这个空间模式的问题在二战即将结束时，曾引发了许多关注。当时，德军的 V2 火箭开始轰炸伦敦城。这些火箭非常可怕，飞行速度达到了 5 倍音速，因此当人们听到它们飞过来的声音时，火箭其实早已落地。很快，报纸就公布了火箭落点的分布图，在这些图中，人们似乎可以看到并非随机而像是有特定目的的成簇落点。在一些观察人士看来，这一簇簇落点，就是火箭飞行轨迹控制精度的一种体现。由于火箭的飞行距离很长，因此这些簇模式似乎表明，德国人的科技水平已经达到一个大家做梦都想不到的先进程度。公众怀疑那些躲过了 V2 攻击的区域，就是有德国间谍的地方。而军方高层担心德国人会把关键的军事地点作为目标，从而造成毁灭性的后果。

1946 年，《精算师学会杂志》（ Journal of the Institute of Actuaries ）发表了对上述轰炸数据的数学分析结果。作者克拉克将研究区域分为边长为 0.5 公里的 576 个正方形小格子。这些格子中有 229 个从未遭到轰击，而另一方面，尽管格子的面积很小，却有 8 个格子遭到了 4-5 次轰击。不过，克拉克的分析表明，跟之前那个扔硬币的数据一样，这些落点数据的总体分布模式，仍然符合随机分布。

1-3『这个例子在刘嘉的概率论专栏课里看到过，用泊松分布方程可以检验。（2021-03-01）』

在有关癌症集中高发区的报告中，我们也经常会发现类似问题。如果将任何一个城市或国家分成很多小格，然后让癌症病例在这些小格中随机分布，那么有些格子中的病例数将低于平均值，有些则高于平均值。实际上，根据加利福尼亚州职业安全和健康管理局主管雷蒙德·里查德·诺伊特拉的说法，根据记录几十种不同癌症本地发病率的常见癌症等级数据库，我们有超过 50% 的把握，在加利福尼亚州 5000 个普查区域的 2750 个区域中发现具有统计显著性却是随机结果的某种癌症的高发区。如果对足够多的格子进行观察，我们就能发现，有些区域的癌症发病率，甚至比正常水平高出很多倍。

如果将癌症病例分配好再来画格子，得到的图景会让人感觉更糟。这种做法造成的结果被称为神枪手效应，它得名于一个造假的家伙。这个家伙的枪法比别人的都要好，因为他先朝着一张白纸开枪，然后在纸上画出靶子。不幸的是，这种事情在现实中经常发生：某些市民首先注意到一些邻居得了癌症，然后确定他们认为的癌症高发区域的边界。现在的互联网能够为我们提供广泛且可获取的数据，因此最近就有一些人在美国境内寻找这样的团簇。这些团簇毫不意外一个接一个被找到。但癌症的发生需要细胞不断变异，因此需要长时间暴露在致癌物质中和或存在着高浓度的致癌物。如果这些高发区团簇的确是由环境因素引发的，而且其效果在这些受害者搬离这一地区之前就能够显现出来，那么还真需要一些运气。根据诺伊特拉的说法，人们需要暴露在通常仅能在接收化疗的病人体内或某些特定的工作环境中才能见到的高浓度致癌物质中，才能产生这种程度的、需要流行病学家进行调查的癌症高发区，而实际上所需的这种致癌物质的浓度，远比人们在受污染的住所周围或学校中接触到的浓度要高得多。但人们仍然不愿接受这些团簇是随机形成的这一解释，因此，加利福尼亚州健康部门每年都会收到数以千计的居民点癌症集中发作的报告，也因此生产了数百份巨细无遗的分析报告，但没有一份报告能令人信服地给出那个隐藏着的致癌环境因素。明尼苏达州健康部流行病学家艾伦·本德说，这些研究「是对纳税人金钱绝对、完全、彻底的浪费」。

我们现在已经考查了随机模式愚弄我们的几种方式。不过心理学家并不满足于仅仅对这些误解进行研究与分类，他们还希望了解人们被这些误解愚弄的原因。那么就让我们来看看这些原因的其中几个吧。

人们喜欢对周围的环境施加控制。有些人灌了半瓶苏格兰威士忌后照样开车，却在飞机遇上一点儿小小的颠簸时吓得举止失常，原因就在于他在前一种情况中认为自己能控制局面，而在后一种情况中控制权在他人手上。这种控制欲并非毫无缘由，因为事物在自己的控制之下的感觉，已经与自我认知和自尊融为一体了。实际上，我们能做的对自己最有好处的事情，就是找到各种方式控制自己的生活，或者至少是自以为控制了自己的生活。心理学家布鲁诺·贝特尔海姆就发现，要在纳粹集中营中幸存下来，「所依靠的是这样一种能力，即无论周围环境看起来如何具有压迫性，都能进行计划和安排，以保留一些独立行动的空间，并对生活中的某些至关重要的方面保持控制」。后来的研究表明，无来由的无助感以及在控制力上的缺乏，与情绪紧张和疾病发生这两者都有关系。在一项研究中，野鼠突然被剥夺了对环境的所有控制权，它们很快就失去了继续活下去的欲望，就此死亡。在另一项研究中，受试者被告知他们将要参与一组重要的测试，在这种情况下，即使仅仅让受试者控制这些测试的先后顺序，哪怕这种控制毫无意义，也能减少受试者的焦虑。

控制心理学先驱之一的心理学家兼业余画家埃伦·兰格是哈佛大学的一名教授。多年前还在耶鲁时，她曾与人合作，一同研究控制感在看护住家病人的老年人身上所造成的影响。他们告诉其中一组看护，他们可以自行决定房间的布置，还可以挑选一株植物来照料；而另一组的房间事先已经安排好，植物也已经选好并有人打理。几周后，他们发现能对环境施加控制的那一组，其快乐度得分更高。而更令人不安的，则是 18 个月后的跟进研究所得到的令研究者震惊的数据：没有控制权的那一组老年人，死亡率高达 30%；而有控制权的那一组，其死亡率仅为 15%。

人类对控制权的需求，与我们讨论的随机模式有什么关系呢？因为如果事情是随机的，我们就没有掌控权；而如果我们可以做主，事情就不会是随机的。因此，我们对掌握控制权的需求，和我们识别随机性的能力之间存在着根本的冲突，而这正是我们会错误地解释随机事件的主因之一。实际上，心理学研究者最容易做到的事情之一，就是诱导人们将幸运错当成能力，或将无目的的行动错当成在控制什么东西。比如我们可以让人们按一个按钮控制灯的闪烁，而实际上这个按钮是完全无用的。但哪怕灯的闪烁完全随机，人们仍然相信确实是他们在控制着灯。在另一个实验中，研究者给受试者看一圈随机闪烁着的灯，并告诉他们可以通过集中精神让灯泡沿顺时针方向依次被点亮，接着受试者真的觉得自己做到了这一点，并因此而惊讶得目瞪口呆。我们还可以让两个小组在类似的实验设置下相互竞争，其中一组努力让闪烁按顺时针方向进行，而另一组要让它按逆时针发生，结果这两组人都觉得闪烁方向与他们自己希望的方向是一致的。

兰格一次又一次地证明，这种对掌控感的需求，影响了我们对随机事件的准确感知。在她的一项研究中我们看到，相较于一个充满自信的对手，参与者在与一个神经兮兮、笨手笨脚的对手竞争时，对成功更有信心，尽管他们参加的不过是纸牌游戏，而且在游戏中获胜可能完全靠运气。在另一项研究中，她让一组聪明且受过良好教育的耶鲁大学本科生，去预测 30 次扔硬币的结果。实验设计者秘密地操纵了扔硬币的结果，使每个学生刚好猜对一半；另外对其中的某些学生，实验设计者让他们在开始时能够连猜连中。等这 30 次扔完后，研究者对学生们做了个小小的问卷调查，以了解他们是如何评价自己的猜测能力的。许多学生的答案显示，他们似乎认为猜硬币也是一种可以通过培养锻炼来获得和提高的技能。有 1/4 的学生称，他们的表现被一些分心的事情影响。40% 的学生觉得自己的表现能通过训练获得提高。当直接要求他们对自己猜硬币的能力打分时，开始时连续猜中的学生给自己打的分要更高些，尽管对所有受试者而言，他们猜对的次数是一样的。

在另一个巧妙的实验中，兰格设计了一个彩票抽奖。参与的志愿者每人都得到一张交易卡片，卡片上印着某个游戏者的卡片。抽奖的袋子里也放着一张卡片，并且与发下去的某张卡片一模一样。谁拿的卡片跟袋子里的一样，谁就是赢家。游戏者被分成两组，其中一组可以自行挑选卡片，而另一组的卡片是随机分发的。开奖前，每个参与者都可以出售自己的卡片。显然，不管参与者的卡片是自行挑选的，还是随机分发的，其获胜概率都不会受影响。但相较于随机分配得到卡片的参与者，那些自行挑选卡片的人将卡片的售价定到了前者的 4 倍。

兰格实验中的受试者至少在理智上都「知道」，他们参与的游戏是随机的。当我们直接询问受试者时，没有一个人会说自己相信自行挑选卡片会改变获胜的概率。但他们实际的行为却在说着完全相反的事情。或者正如兰格写的那样：「人们可能会在口头上认同偶然性的概念，但他们按偶然事件能被控制来行事。」

随机性在真实生活中扮演的角色，远不像在兰格的实验中那样明显。相比之下，我们对于结果以及控制结果的能力更为关注。因此，在真实生活中我们要抗拒这种控制的错觉，尤为困难。

这种错觉的一种表现方式，常常出现在哪些经历了一段时期的顺风或逆流的机构中，这时不管是成功还是失败，都很容易被归因于机构的领导，而不会被归因于运气以及造成机构目前状况的无数环境因素。在体育运动中，这一点表现得尤为明显。我们在前言中提到过，如果球员有那么一两年表现得十分糟糕，那么教练会被炒鱿鱼。大公司业务庞杂，而且很大程度上受到不可预料的市场因素的影响，因此高层管理者的聪明才智与公司业绩之间的关系，更说不上有多么直接了。如果因为公司糟糕的效益而条件反射式地解雇高管，这个效果就一点儿也不比解雇教练来得好。哥伦比亚大学和哈佛大学的研究者们最近就对许多公司进行了研究。这些公司设立的规章制度让它们很容易受到股东的影响，因此一旦遭遇困难处境，应对之策往往就是更换管理层。研究者发现，在旧的管理人员被解聘后的三年中，平均而言，公司的业绩（以盈利计算）并无改善。不管首席执行官们在个人能力上有什么差别，他们的个人能力总是受到整个体系中那些不可控因素的影响，就好像音乐家演奏水平的差别，在充斥着噪声的广播中会变得不那么明显了一样。但在决定补救措施的时候，公司董事会的所作所为，却好像是在说首席执行官是全公司唯一紧要的人。

研究还表明，对于那些实际结果由随机造成的任务，如果我们在结果发生之前，先进行一段时间的战略安排（比如那开不完的会议），或者在这些任务需要人们发挥主动性去参与的时候（那些待在办公室里的漫长时间），或者在任务中存在竞争的时候（哪有什么竞争啊！是吧？），对于偶然事件的可控错觉，就会在金融、体育，特别是商业环境中被进一步强化。与可控错觉做斗争的第一步，就是要认识到它的存在。但即使做到了这一点，前路仍然艰辛，因为一旦我们觉得自己发现了一个模式，就不会轻易放弃这个发现，就如同下面的例子要展示的那样。

假设我制定一条规则，然后用这条规则构造由 3 个数字组成的一个序列。如果现在我告诉你 {2,4,6} 这个序列是符合规则的，那么你是否能猜出这条规则是什么？只靠一个由 3 个数字组成的集合，当然不足以让游戏继续。因此，设想一下现在由你来告诉我一些其他的 3 个数字组成的序列，而我告诉你它们是否满足规则。好了，现在请你稍事停顿，想一些这样的数字序列出来。相较于直接和人互动，阅读的好处就在于，作者可以在书中表现出无限的耐心。

现在你已经考虑好你的策略。如果你跟大多数人一样，那么我敢说你设想的差不多就是 {4,6,8} 或 {8,10,12} 或 {20,24,30} 这一类的序列。是的，这些序列都满足我的规则。那么这个规则到底是什么呢？大多数人在列举了若干类似的测试例子后，会变得越来越有信心，并认为这个规则就是序列由递增的偶数构成。实际上，我的规则不过是要求序列必须由递增的数字构成。例如序列 {1,2,3} 也满足规则。这些数字不必为偶数。你设想的序列是否能揭示这一点呢？

一旦被错觉掌控，或者在本例中，当我们有了新想法时，我们通常不是去寻找方法证明这个想法错了，而是试图去证明它是正确的，心理学家称其为「确认偏误」。如果我们希望避免对随机性进行错误解释，它就构成了一个主要障碍。在上面的例子中，大多数人立刻认识到，我给出的序列是递增的偶数。然后为了证实这个猜测，他们测试了许多这一类型的序列。但很少有人能更迅速地找到答案，也就是通过测试包含奇数的序列来证伪他们的猜想。哲学家弗朗西斯·培根在 1620 年写道：「人类的理解力一旦采纳了某个想法，就会收集任何能证实该想法的例子，哪怕反例可能更多也更有分量，但人们要么不去注意它们，要么干脆拒绝接受它们，以此保证自己所采纳的观点仍能维持那不可动摇的地位。」

更糟的是，我们不仅会有倾向性地去寻找证实预设观念的证据，而且会将模棱两可的证据按有利于我们想法的方式进行解释。这可是个大问题，因为数据经常是模棱两可的。通过忽略某些模式并强调另外一些模式，我们聪明的大脑可以强化它的信念，即使在缺乏确有说服力的数据时也如此。比如，如果我们根据可信度不高的证据认为新邻居是个不友好的家伙，那么他今后的任何可以用「不友好」加以解释的行为，都会留在我们的脑海中，而其他行为很容易被我们遗忘。如果我们信任某个政治家，那么当她干得好时，功劳当然都归她。而当她做得不好时，该责怪的就是大环境或她的对手，但不管怎样，我们都只是在不断强化我们开始的想法。

一项研究生动地向我们展现了确认偏误的效果。研究者集中了一群本科生，其中某些人支持死刑，另一些人则反对。然后，研究者给所有学生提供了一些关于死刑实际效果的学术研究成果，两组所得的资料是相同的。在这些资料中，一半的结论支持死刑具有威慑力的观点，而另一半正好相反。研究者还为受试者提供了若干线索，这些线索表明上述研究都存在若干弱点。然后，研究者让这些学生独自给各项研究的质量评分，并说明他们对死刑的态度是否以及在多大程度上会受这些研究的影响。参与者对那些支持自己最初观点的研究给予了更高的分数，哪怕双方的研究是用同样的方法进行的。最后，尽管每个人都阅读了相同的研究报告，但开始时持不同观点的人都宣称这些资料强化了他们的信念。这些数据不但没有说服任何人，反而使双方观点的两极分化更加严重。因此，即使是一个随机模式，如果它与我们的成见相吻合，我们也会把它解释为具有说服力的证据。

确认偏误在实际中造成了许多不幸的后果。如果一名教师在开始时相信某个学生比另一个更聪明，他就会有选择性地将注意力集中在那些倾向于证实这一猜想的证据上。如果一名雇主对一个符合他的某些预设想法的应聘者进行面试，那么他通常会迅速形成第一印象，然后将剩下的面试时间用来寻找支持这种印象的信息。如果临床咨询顾问被提前告知某来访者生性好斗，那么他们将倾向于得出来访者确实好斗的结论，哪怕该来访者并不比普通人好斗。人们在解释少数族裔的一些行为时，也常常会根据一个预设的「样板」加以解释。

人类的大脑已经进化到能高效进行模式识别的水平。但正如确认偏误所显示的那样，我们的注意力主要放在了发现和确认这些模式上，而不是将错误结论降到最少。但我们也不需要对此感到悲观，因为我们仍然有可能克服这些偏见。能够认识到偶然事件也能产生模式，仅这一点就是一个开始了。如果我们能够学会质疑我们的观点和理论，那么又是前进了一大步。最后我们还应该学会，不但要寻找证明我们正确的原因，而且要用同样多的时间寻找证明我们错误的证据。

我们这段穿越随机性的旅程，现在快到终点了。我们从简单的规则开始我们的旅程，并了解了这些规则是如何在那些复杂的系统中表现自己的。那么对我们自身命运这个最为重要的复杂系统而言，偶然性扮演的角色到底有多重要呢？这可是个难题，其中包含了我们至此所考虑过的大部分内容。虽然我并不指望自己能够给出一个完整的答案，但我很希望能使这个问题变得更清晰。在下一章的标题，同时也是本书的书名中，读者可以很明显地看出我对这个问题的回答：醉汉的脚步。

## 1001. The Drunkard's Walk

IN 1814, near the height of the great successes of Newtonian physics, Pierre-Simon de Laplace wrote:

If an intelligence, at a given instant, knew all the forces that animate nature and the position of each constituent being; if, moreover, this intelligence were sufficiently great to submit these data to analysis, it could embrace in the same formula the movements of the greatest bodies in the universe and those of the smallest atoms: to this intelligence nothing would be uncertain, and the future, as the past, would be present to its eyes.1

Laplace was expressing a view called determinism: the idea that the state of the world at the present determines precisely the manner in which the future will unfold.

In everyday life, determinism implies a world in which our personal qualities and the properties of any given situation or environment lead directly and unequivocally to precise consequences. That is an orderly world, one in which everything can be foreseen, computed, predicted. But for Laplace's dream to hold true, several conditions must be met. First, the laws of nature must dictate a definite future, and we must know those laws. Second, we must have access to data that completely describe the system of interest, allowing no unforeseen influences. Finally, we must have sufficient intelligence or computing power to be able to decide what, given the data about the present, the laws say the future will hold. In this book we've examined many concepts that aid our understanding of random phenomena. Along the way we've gained insight into a variety of specific life situations. Yet there remains the big picture, the question of how much randomness contributes to where we are in life and how well we can predict where we are going.

In the study of human affairs from the late Renaissance to the Victorian era, many scholars shared Laplace's belief in determinism. They felt as Galton did that our path in life is strictly determined by our personal qualities, or like Quételet they believed that the future of society is predictable. Often they were inspired by the success of Newtonian physics and believed that human behavior could be foretold as reliably as other phenomena in nature. It seemed reasonable to them that the future events of the everyday world should be as rigidly determined by the present state of affairs as are the orbits of the planets.

In the 1960s a meteorologist named Edward Lorenz sought to employ the newest technology of his day — a primitive computer — to carry out Laplace's program in the limited realm of the weather. That is, if Lorenz supplied his noisy machine with data on the atmospheric conditions of his idealized earth at some given time, it would employ the known laws of meteorology to calculate and print out rows of numbers representing the weather conditions at future times.

One day, Lorenz decided he wanted to extend a particular simulation further into the future. Instead of repeating the entire calculation, he decided to take a shortcut by beginning the calculation midway through. To accomplish that, he employed as initial conditions data printed out in the earlier simulation. He expected the computer to regenerate the remainder of the previous simulation and then carry it further. But instead he noticed something strange: the weather had evolved differently. Rather than duplicating the end of the previous simulation, the new one diverged wildly. He soon recognized why: in the computer's memory the data were stored to six decimal places, but in the printout they were quoted to only three. As a result, the data he had supplied were a tiny bit off. A number like 0.293416, for example, would have appeared simply as 0.293.

Scientists usually assume that if the initial conditions of a system are altered slightly, the evolution of that system, too, will be altered slightly. After all, the satellites that collect weather data can measure parameters to only two or three decimal places, and so they cannot even track a difference as tiny as that between 0.293416 and 0.293. But Lorenz found that such small differences led to massive changes in the result.2 The phenomenon was dubbed the butterfly effect, based on the implication that atmospheric changes so small they could have been caused by a butterfly flapping its wings can have a large effect on subsequent global weather patterns. That notion might sound absurd — the equivalent of the extra cup of coffee you sip one morning leading to profound changes in your life. But actually that does happen — for instance, if the extra time you spent caused you to cross paths with your future wife at the train station or to miss being hit by a car that sped through a red light. In fact, Lorenz's story is itself an example of the butterfly effect, for if he hadn't taken the minor decision to extend his calculation employing the shortcut, he would not have discovered the butterfly effect, a discovery which sparked a whole new field of mathematics. When we look back in detail on the major events of our lives, it is not uncommon to be able to identify such seemingly inconsequential random events that led to big changes.

Determinism in human affairs fails to meet the requirements for predictability alluded to by Laplace for several reasons. First, as far as we know, society is not governed by definite and fundamental laws in the way physics is. Instead, people's behavior is not only unpredictable, but as Kahneman and Tversky repeatedly showed, also often irrational (in the sense that we act against our best interests). Second, even if we could uncover the laws of human affairs, as Quételet attempted to do, it is impossible to precisely know or control the circumstances of life. That is, like Lorenz, we cannot obtain the precise data necessary for making predictions. And third, human affairs are so complex that it is doubtful we could carry out the necessary calculations even if we understood the laws and possessed the data. As a result, determinism is a poor model for the human experience. Or as the Nobel laureate Max Born wrote,「Chance is a more fundamental conception than causality.」3

In the scientific study of random processes the drunkard's walk is the archetype. In our lives it also provides an apt model, for like the granules of pollen floating in the Brownian fluid, we're continually nudged in this direction and then that one by random events. As a result, although statistical regularities can be found in social data, the future of particular individuals is impossible to predict, and for our particular achievements, our jobs, our friends, our finances, we all owe more to chance than many people realize. On the following pages, I shall argue, furthermore, that in all except the simplest real-life endeavors unforeseeable or unpredictable forces cannot be avoided, and moreover those random forces and our reactions to them account for much of what constitutes our particular path in life. I will begin my argument by exploring an apparent contradiction to that idea: if the future is really chaotic and unpredictable, why, after events have occurred, does it often seem as if we should have been able to foresee them?

IN THE FALL OF 1941, a few months before the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor, an agent in Tokyo sent a spy in Honolulu an alarming request.4 The request was intercepted and sent to the Office of Naval Intelligence. It wended its way through the bureaucracy, reaching Washington in decoded and translated form on October 9. The message requested the Japanese agent in Honolulu to divide Pearl Harbor into five areas and to make reports on ships in the harbor with reference to those areas. Of special interest were battleships, destroyers, and aircraft carriers, as well as information regarding the anchoring of more than one ship at a single dock. Some weeks later another curious incident occurred: U.S. monitors lost track of radio communications from all known carriers in the first and second Japanese fleets, losing with it all knowledge of their whereabouts. Then in early December the Combat Intelligence Unit of the Fourteenth Naval District in Hawaii reported that the Japanese had changed their call signs for the second time in a month. Call signs, such as WCBS or KNPR, are designations identifying the source of a radio transmission. In wartime they reveal the identity of a source not only to friend but also to foe, so they are periodically altered. The Japanese had a habit of changing them every six months or more. To change them twice in thirty days was considered a「step in preparing for active operations on a large scale.」The change made identification of the whereabouts of Japanese carriers and submarines in the ensuing days difficult, further confusing the issue of the radio silence.

Two days later messages sent to Japanese diplomatic and consular posts at Hong Kong, Singapore, Batavia, Manila, Washington, and London were intercepted and decoded. They called for the diplomats to destroy most of their codes and ciphers immediately and to burn all other important confidential and secret documents. Around that time the FBI also intercepted a telephone call from a cook at the Japanese consulate in Hawaii to someone in Honolulu reporting in great excitement that the officials there were burning all major documents. The assistant head of the main unit of army intelligence, Lieutenant Colonel George W. Bicknell, brought one of the intercepted messages to his boss as he was preparing to go to dinner with the head of the army's Hawaiian Department. It was late afternoon on Saturday, December 6, the day before the attack. Bicknell's higher-up took five minutes to consider the message, then dismissed it and went to eat. With events so foreboding when considered in hindsight, why hadn't anyone privy to this information seen the attack coming?

In any complex string of events in which each event unfolds with some element of uncertainty, there is a fundamental asymmetry between past and future. This asymmetry has been the subject of scientific study ever since Boltzmann made his statistical analysis of the molecular processes responsible for the properties of fluids (see chapter 8). Imagine, for example, a dye molecule floating in a glass of water. The molecule will, like one of Brown's granules, follow a drunkard's walk. But even that aimless movement makes progress in some direction. If you wait three hours, for example, the molecule will typically have traveled about an inch from where it started. Suppose that at some point the molecule moves to a position of significance and so finally attracts our attention. As many did after Pearl Harbor, we might look for the reason why that unexpected event occurred. Now suppose we dig into the molecule's past. Suppose, in fact, we trace the record of all its collisions. We will indeed discover how first this bump from a water molecule and then that one propelled the dye molecule on its zigzag path from there to here. In hindsight, in other words, we can clearly explain why the past of the dye molecule developed as it did. But the water contains many other water molecules that could have been the ones that interacted with the dye molecule. To predict the dye molecule's path beforehand would have therefore required us to calculate the paths and mutual interactions of all those potentially important water molecules. That would have involved an almost unimaginable number of mathematical calculations, far greater in scope and difficulty than the list of collisions needed to understand the past. In other words, the movement of the dye molecule was virtually impossible to predict before the fact even though it was relatively easy to understand afterward.

That fundamental asymmetry is why in day-to-day life the past often seems obvious even when we could not have predicted it. It's why weather forecasters can tell you the reasons why three days ago the cold front moved like this and yesterday the warm front moved like that, causing it to rain on your romantic garden wedding, but the same forecasters are much less successful at knowing how the fronts will behave three days hence and at providing the warning you would have needed to get that big tent ready. Or consider a game of chess. Unlike card games, chess involves no explicit random element. And yet there is uncertainty because neither player knows for sure what his or her opponent will do next. If the players are expert, at most points in the game it may be possible to see a few moves into the future; if you look out any further, the uncertainty will compound, and no one will be able to say with any confidence exactly how the game will turn out. On the other hand, looking back, it is usually easy to say why each player made the moves he or she made. This again is a probabilistic process whose future is difficult to predict but whose past is easy to understand.

The same thing is true of the stock market. Consider, for instance, the performance of mutual funds. As I mentioned in chapter 9, it is common, when choosing a mutual fund, to look at past performance. Indeed, it is easy to find nice, orderly patterns when looking back. Here, for example, is a graph of the performance of 800 mutual fund managers over the five-year period, 1991–1995.

Performance versus ranking of the top mutual funds in the five-year period 1991–1995.

On the vertical axis are plotted the funds' gains or losses relative to the average fund of the group. In other words, a return of 0 percent means the fund's performance was average for this five-year period. On the horizontal axis is plotted the managers' relative rank, from the number-1 performer to the number-800 performer. To look up the performance of, say, the 100th most successful mutual fund manager in the given five-year period, you find the point on the graph corresponding to the spot labeled 100 on the horizontal axis.

Any analyst, no doubt, could give a number of convincing reasons why the top managers represented here succeeded, why the bottom ones failed, and why the curve should take this shape. And whether or not we take the time to follow such analyses in detail, few are the investors who would choose a fund that has performed 10 percent below average in the past five years over a fund that has done 10 percent better than average. It is easy, looking at the past, to construct such nice graphs and neat explanations, but this logical picture of events is just an illusion of hindsight with little relevance for predicting future events. In the graph on chapter 10, for example, I compare how the same funds, still ranked in order of their performance in the initial five-year period, performed in the next five-year period. In other words, I maintain the ranking based on the period 1991–1995, but display the return the funds achieved in 1996–2000. If the past were a good indication of the future, the funds I considered in the period 1991–1995 would have had more or less the same relative performance in 1996–2000. That is, if the winners (at the left of the graph) continued to do better than the others, and the losers (at the right) worse, this graph should be nearly identical to the last. Instead, as we can see, the order of the past dissolves when extrapolated to the future, and the graph ends up looking like random noise.

People systematically fail to see the role of chance in the success of ventures and in the success of people like the equity-fund manager Bill Miller. And we unreasonably believe that the mistakes of the past must be consequences of ignorance or incompetence and could have been remedied by further study and improved insight. That's why, for example, in spring 2007, when the stock of Merrill Lynch was trading around `$`95 a share, its CEO E. Stanley O'Neal could be celebrated as the risk-taking genius responsible, and in the fall of 2007, after the credit market collapsed, derided as the risk-taking cowboy responsible — and promptly fired. We afford automatic respect to superstar business moguls, politicians, and actors and to anyone flying around in a private jet, as if their accomplishments must reflect unique qualities not shared by those forced to eat commercial-airline food. And we place too much confidence in the overly precise predictions of people — political pundits, financial experts, business consultants — who claim a track record demonstrating expertise.

How the top funds in 1991–1995 performed in 1996–2000.

One large publishing company I'm familiar with went to great pains to develop one-year, three-year, and five-year plans for its educational software division. There were high-paid consultants, lengthy marketing meetings, late-night financial-analysis sessions, long offsite afternoon powwows. In the end, hunches were turned into formulas claiming the precision of several decimal places, and wild guesses were codified as likely outcomes. When in the first year certain products didn't sell as well as expected or others sold better than projected, reasons were found and the appropriate employees blamed or credited as if the initial expectations had been meaningful. The next year saw a series of unforeseen price wars started by two competitors. The year after that the market for educational software collapsed. As the uncertainty compounded, the three-year plan never had a chance to succeed. And the five-year plan, polished and precise as a diamond, was spared any comparison with performance, for by then virtually everyone in the division had moved on to greener pastures.

Historians, whose profession is to study the past, are as wary as scientists of the idea that events unfold in a manner that can be predicted. In fact, in the study of history the illusion of inevitability has such serious consequences that it is one of the few things that both conservative and socialist historians can agree on. The socialist historian Richard Henry Tawney, for example, put it like this:「Historians give an appearance of inevitability…by dragging into prominence the forces which have triumphed and thrusting into the background those which they have swallowed up.」5 And the historian Roberta Wohlstetter, who received the Presidential Medal of Freedom from Ronald Reagan, said it this way:「After the event, of course, a signal is always crystal clear; we can now see what disaster it was signaling…. But before the event it is obscure and pregnant with conflicting meanings.」6

In some sense this idea is encapsulated in the cliché that hindsight is always 20/20, but people often behave as if the adage weren't true. In government, for example, a should-have-known-it blame game is played after every tragedy. In the case of Pearl Harbor (and the September 11 attacks) the events leading up to the attack, when we look back at them, certainly seem to point in an obvious direction. Yet as with the dye molecule, the weather, or the chess game, if you start well before the fact and trace events forward, the feeling of inevitability quickly dissolves. For one thing, in addition to the intelligence reports I quoted, there was a huge amount of useless intelligence, with each week bringing new reams of sometimes alarming or mysterious messages and transcripts that would later prove misleading or insignificant. And even if we focused on the reports that hindsight tells us were important, before the attack there existed for each of those reports a reasonable alternative explanation that did not point toward a surprise attack on Pearl Harbor. For example, the request to divide Pearl Harbor into five areas was similar in style to other requests that had gone to Japanese agents in Panama, Vancouver, San Francisco, and Portland, Oregon. The loss of radio contact was also not unheard of and had in the past often meant simply that the warships were in home waters and communicating via telegraphic landlines. Moreover, even if you believed a broadening of the war was impending, many signs pointed toward an attack elsewhere — in the Philippines, on the Thai peninsula, or on Guam, for example. There were not, to be sure, as many red herrings as water molecules encountered by a molecule of dye, but there were enough to obscure a clear vision of the future.

After Pearl Harbor seven committees of the U.S. Congress delved into the process of discovering why the military had missed all the「signs」of a coming attack. Army Chief of Staff General George Marshall, for one, drew heavy criticism for a May 1941 memo to President Roosevelt in which he wrote that「the Island of Oahu, due to its fortification, its garrison and its physical characteristic, is believed to be the strongest fortress in the world」and reassured the president that, in case of attack, enemy forces would be intercepted「within 200 miles of their objective…by all types of bombardment.」General Marshall was no fool, but neither did he have a crystal ball. The study of randomness tells us that the crystal ball view of events is possible, unfortunately, only after they happen. And so we believe we know why a film did well, a candidate won an election, a storm hit, a stock went down, a soccer team lost, a new product failed, or a disease took a turn for the worse, but such expertise is empty in the sense that it is of little use in predicting when a film will do well, a candidate will win an election, a storm will hit, a stock will go down, a soccer team will lose, a new product will fail, or a disease will take a turn for the worse.

It is easy to concoct stories explaining the past or to become confident about dubious scenarios for the future. That there are traps in such endeavors doesn't mean we should not undertake them. But we can work to immunize ourselves against our errors of intuition. We can learn to view both explanations and prophecies with skepticism. We can focus on the ability to react to events rather than relying on the ability to predict them, on qualities like flexibility, confidence, courage, and perseverance. And we can place more importance on our direct impressions of people than on their well-trumpeted past accomplishments. In these ways we can resist forming judgments in our automatic deterministic framework.

IN MARCH 1979 another famously unanticipated chain of events occurred, this one at a nuclear power plant in Pennsylvania.7 It resulted in a partial meltdown of the core, in which the nuclear reaction occurs, threatening to release into the environment an alarming dose of radiation. The mishap began when a cup or so of water emerged through a leaky seal from a water filter called a polisher. The leaked water entered a pneumatic system that drives some of the plant's instruments, tripping two valves. The tripped valves shut down the flow of cold water to the plant's steam generator — the system responsible for removing the heat generated by the nuclear reaction in the core. An emergency water pump then came on, but a valve in each of its two pipes had been left in a closed position after maintenance two days earlier. The pumps therefore were pumping water uselessly toward a dead end. Moreover, a pressure-relief valve also failed, as did a gauge in the control room that ought to have shown that the valve was not working.

Viewed separately, each of the failures was of a type considered both commonplace and acceptable. Polisher problems were not unusual at the plant, nor were they normally very serious; with hundreds of valves regularly being opened or closed in a nuclear power plant, leaving some valves in the wrong position was not considered rare or alarming; and the pressure-relief valve was known to be somewhat unreliable and had failed at times without major consequences in at least eleven other power plants. Yet strung together, these failures make the plant seem as if it had been run by the Keystone Kops. And so after the incident at Three Mile Island came many investigations and much laying of blame, as well as a very different consequence. That string of events spurred Yale sociologist Charles Perrow to create a new theory of accidents, in which is codified the central argument of this chapter: in complex systems (among which I count our lives) we should expect that minor factors we can usually ignore will by chance sometimes cause major incidents.8

In his theory Perrow recognized that modern systems are made up of thousands of parts, including fallible human decision makers, which interrelate in ways that are, like Laplace's atoms, impossible to track and anticipate individually. Yet one can bet on the fact that just as atoms executing a drunkard's walk will eventually get somewhere, so too will accidents eventually occur. Called normal accident theory, Perrow's doctrine describes how that happens — how accidents can occur without clear causes, without those glaring errors and incompetent villains sought by corporate or government commissions. But although normal accident theory is a theory of why, inevitably, things sometimes go wrong, it could also be flipped around to explain why, inevitably, they sometimes go right. For in a complex undertaking, no matter how many times we fail, if we keep trying, there is often a good chance we will eventually succeed. In fact, economists like W. Brian Arthur argue that a concurrence of minor factors can even lead companies with no particular edge to come to dominate their competitors.「In the real world,」he wrote,「if several similar-sized firms entered a market together, small fortuitous events — unexpected orders, chance meetings with buyers, managerial whims — would help determine which ones received early sales and, over time, which came to dominate. Economic activity is…[determined] by individual transactions that are too small to foresee, and these small ‘random' events could [ac]cumulate and become magnified by positive feedbacks over time.」9

The same phenomenon has been noticed by researchers in sociology. One group, for example, studied the buying habits of consumers in what sociologists call the cultural industries — books, film, art, music. The conventional marketing wisdom in those fields is that success is achieved by anticipating consumer preference. In this view the most productive way for executives to spend their time is to study what it is about the likes of Stephen King, Madonna, or Bruce Willis that appeals to so many fans. They study the past and, as I've just argued, have no trouble extracting reasons for whatever success they are attempting to explain. They then try to replicate it.

That is the deterministic view of the marketplace, a view in which it is mainly the intrinsic qualities of the person or the product that governs success. But there is another way to look at it, a nondeterministic view. In this view there are many high-quality but unknown books, singers, actors, and what makes one or another come to stand out is largely a conspiracy of random and minor factors — that is, luck. In this view the traditional executives are just spinning their wheels.

Thanks to the Internet, this idea has been tested. The researchers who tested it focused on the music market, in which Internet sales are coming to dominate. For their study they recruited 14,341 participants who were asked to listen to, rate, and if they desired, download 48 songs by bands they had not heard of.10 Some of the participants were also allowed to view data on the popularity of each song — that is, on how many fellow participants had downloaded it. These participants were divided into eight separate「worlds」and could see only the data on downloads of people in their own world. All the artists in all the worlds began with zero downloads, after which each world evolved independently. There was also a ninth group of participants, who were not shown any data. The researchers employed the popularity of the songs in this latter group of insulated listeners to define the「intrinsic quality」of each song — that is, its appeal in the absence of external influence.

If the deterministic view of the world were true, the same songs ought to have dominated in each of the eight worlds, and the popularity rankings in those worlds ought to have agreed with the intrinsic quality as determined by the isolated individuals. But the researchers found exactly the opposite: the popularity of individual songs varied widely among the different worlds, and different songs of similar intrinsic quality also varied widely in their popularity. For example, a song called「Lockdown」by a band called 52metro ranked twenty-six out of forty-eight in intrinsic quality but was the number-1 song in one world and the number-40 song in another. In this experiment, as one song or another by chance got an early edge in downloads, its seeming popularity influenced future shoppers. It's a phenomenon that is well-known in the movie industry: moviegoers will report liking a movie more when they hear beforehand how good it is. In this example, small chance influences created a snowball effect and made a huge difference in the future of the song. Again, it's the butterfly effect.

In our lives, too, we can see through the microscope of close scrutiny that many major events would have turned out differently were it not for the random confluence of minor factors, people we've met by chance, job opportunities that randomly came our way. For example, consider the actor who, for seven years starting in the late 1970s, lived in a fifth-floor walk-up on Forty-ninth Street in Manhattan, struggling to make a name for himself. He worked off-Broadway, sometimes far off, and in television commercials, taking all the steps he could to get noticed, build a career, and earn the money to eat an occasional hanger steak in a restaurant without having to duck out before the check arrived. And like many other wannabes, no matter how hard this aspiring actor worked to get the right parts, make the right career choices, and excel in his trade, his most reliable role remained the one he played in his other career — as a bartender. Then one day in the summer of 1984 he flew to Los Angeles, either to attend the Olympics (if you believe his publicist) or to visit a girlfriend (if you believe The New York Times). Whichever account is accurate, one thing is clear: the decision to visit the West Coast had little to do with acting and much to do with love, or at least the love of sports. Yet it proved to be the best career decision he ever made, most likely the best decision of his life.

The actor's name is Bruce Willis, and while he was in Los Angeles, an agent suggested he go on a few television auditions.11 One was for a show in its final stages of casting. The producers already had a list of finalists in mind, but in Hollywood nothing is final until the ink on the contract is dry and the litigation has ended. Willis got his audition and landed the role — that of David Addison, the male lead paired with Cybill Shepherd in a new ABC offering called Moonlighting.

It might be tempting to believe that Willis was the obvious choice over Mr. X, the fellow at the top of the list when the newcomer arrived, and that the rest is, as they say, history. Since in hindsight we know that Moonlighting and Willis became huge successes, it is hard to imagine the assemblage of Hollywood decision makers, upon seeing Willis, doing anything but lighting up stogies as they celebrated their brilliant discovery and put to flame their now-outmoded list of finalists. But what really happened at the casting session is more like what you get when you send your kids out for a single gallon of ice cream and two want strawberry while the third demands triple-chocolate-fudge brownie. The network executives fought for Mr. X, their judgment being that Willis did not look like a serious lead. Glenn Caron, Moonlighting's executive producer, argued for Willis. It is easy, looking back, to dismiss the network executives as ignorant buffoons. In my experience, television producers often do, especially when the executives are out of earshot. But before we make that choice, consider this: television viewers at first agreed with the executives' mediocre assessment. Moonlighting debuted in March 1985 to low ratings and continued with a mediocre performance through the rest of its first season. Only in the second season did viewers change their minds and the show become a major hit. Willis's appeal and his success were apparently unforeseeable until, of course, he suddenly became a star. One might at this point chalk up the story to crazy Hollywood, but Willis's drunkard's walk to success is not at all unusual. A path punctuated by random impacts and unintended consequences is the path of many successful people, not only in their careers but also in their loves, hobbies, and friendships. In fact, it is more the rule than the exception.

I was watching late-night television recently when another star, though not one from the entertainment world, appeared for an interview. His name is Bill Gates. Though the interviewer is known for his sarcastic approach, toward Gates he seemed unusually deferential. Even the audience seemed to ogle Gates. The reason, of course, is that for thirteen years straight Gates was named the richest man in the world by Forbes magazine. In fact, since founding Microsoft, Gates has earned more than `$`100 a second. And so when he was asked about his vision for interactive television, everyone waited with great anticipation to hear what he had to say. But his answer was ordinary, no more creative, ingenious, or insightful than anything I've heard from a dozen other computer professionals. Which brings us to this question: does Gates earn `$`100 per second because he is godlike, or is he godlike because he earns `$`100 per second?

In August 1980, when a group of IBM employees working on a secret project to build a personal computer flew to Seattle to meet with the young computer entrepreneur, Bill Gates was running a small company and IBM needed a program, called an operating system, for its planned「home computer.」Recollections of the ensuing events vary, but the gist goes like this:12 Gates said he couldn't provide the operating system and referred the IBM people to a famed programmer named Gary Kildall at Digital Research Inc. The talks between IBM and Kildall did not go well. For one thing, when IBM showed up at DRI's offices, Kildall's then wife, the company's business manager, refused to sign IBM's nondisclosure agreement. The IBM emissaries called again, and that time Kildall did meet with them. No one knows exactly what transpired in that meeting, but if an informal deal was made, it didn't stick. Around that time one of the IBM employees, Jack Sams, saw Gates again. They both knew of another operating system that was available, a system that was, depending on whom you ask, based on or inspired by Kildall's. According to Sams, Gates said,「Do you want to get…[that operating system], or do you want me to?」Sams, apparently not appreciating the implications, said,「By all means, you get it.」Gates did, for `$`50,000 (or, by some accounts, a bit more), made a few changes, and renamed it DOS (disk operating system). IBM, apparently with little faith in the potential of its new idea, licensed DOS from Gates for a low per-copy royalty fee, letting Gates retain the rights. DOS was no better — and many, including most computer professionals, would claim far worse — than, say, Apple's Macintosh operating system. But the growing base of IBM users encouraged software developers to write for DOS, thereby encouraging prospective users to buy IBM machines, a circumstance that in turn encouraged software developers to write for DOS. In other words, as W. Brian Arthur would say, people bought DOS because people were buying DOS. In the fluid world of computer entrepreneurs, Gates became the molecule that broke from the pack. But had it not been for Kildall's uncooperativeness, IBM's lack of vision, or the second encounter between Sams and Gates, despite whatever visionary or business acumen Gates possesses, he might have become just another software entrepreneur rather than the richest man in the world, and that is probably why his vision seems like that of just that — another software entrepreneur.

Our society can be quick to make wealthy people into heroes and poor ones into goats. That's why the real estate mogul Donald Trump, whose Plaza Hotel went bankrupt and whose casino empire went bankrupt twice (a shareholder who invested `$`10,000 in his casino company in 1994 would thirteen years later have come away with `$`636),13 nevertheless dared to star in a wildly successful television program in which he judged the business acumen of aspiring young people.

Obviously it can be a mistake to assign brilliance in proportion to wealth. We cannot see a person's potential, only his or her results, so we often misjudge people by thinking that the results must reflect the person. The normal accident theory of life shows not that the connection between actions and rewards is random but that random influences are as important as our qualities and actions.

On an emotional level many people resist the idea that random influences are important even if, on an intellectual level, they understand that they are. If people underestimate the role of chance in the careers of moguls, do they also downplay its role in the lives of the least successful? In the 1960s that question inspired the social psychologist Melvin Lerner to look into society's negative attitudes toward the poor.14 Realizing that「few people would engage in extended activity if they believed that there were a random connection between what they did and the rewards they received,」15 Lerner concluded that「for the sake of their own sanity,」people overestimate the degree to which ability can be inferred from success.16 We are inclined, that is, to see movie stars as more talented than aspiring movie stars and to think that the richest people in the world must also be the smartest.

WE MIGHT NOT THINK we judge people according to their income or outward signs of success, but even when we know for a fact that a person's salary is completely random, many people cannot avoid making the intuitive judgment that salary is correlated with worth. Melvin Lerner examined that issue by arranging for subjects to sit in a small darkened auditorium facing a one-way mirror.17 From their seats these observers could gaze into a small well-lit room containing a table and two chairs. The observers were led to believe that two workers, Tom and Bill, would soon enter the room and work together for fifteen minutes unscrambling anagrams. The curtains in front of the viewing window were then closed, and Lerner told the observers that he would keep the curtains shut because the experiment would go better if they could hear but not see the workers, so that they would not be influenced by their appearance. He also told them that because his funds were limited, he could pay only one of the workers, who would be chosen at random. As Lerner left the room, an assistant threw a switch that began to play an audiotape. The observers believed they were listening in as Tom and Bill entered the room behind the curtain and began their work. Actually they were listening to a recording of Tom and Bill reading a fixed script, which had been constructed such that, by various objective measures, each of them appeared to be equally adept and successful at his task. Afterward the observers, not knowing this, were asked to rate Tom and Bill on their effort, creativity, and success. When Tom was selected to receive the payment, about 90 percent of the observers rated him as having made the greater contribution. When Bill was selected, about 70 percent of the observers rated him higher. Despite Tom and Bill's equivalent performance and the observers' knowledge that the pay was randomly assigned, the observers perceived the worker who got paid as being better than the one who had worked for nothing. Alas, as all of those who dress for success know, we are all too easily fooled by the money someone earns.

A series of related studies investigated the same effect from the point of view of the workers themselves.18 Everyone knows that bosses with the right social and academic credentials and a nice title and salary have at times put a higher value on their own ideas than on those of their underlings. Researchers wondered, will people who earn more money purely by chance behave the same way? Does even unearned「success」instill a feeling of superiority? To find out, pairs of volunteers were asked to cooperate on various pointless tasks. In one task, for instance, a black-and-white image was briefly displayed and the subjects had to decide whether the top or the bottom of the image contained a greater proportion of white. Before each task began, one of the subjects was randomly chosen to receive considerably more pay for participating than the other. When that information was not made available, the subjects cooperated pretty harmoniously. But when they knew how much they each were getting paid, the higher-paid subjects exhibited more resistance to input from their partners than the lower-paid ones. Even random differences in pay lead to the backward inference of differences in skill and hence to the development of unequal influence. It's an element of personal and office dynamics that cannot be ignored.

But it is the other side of the question that was closer to the original motivation for Lerner's work. With a colleague, Lerner asked whether people are inclined to feel that those who are not successful or who suffer deserve their fate.19 In that study small groups of female college students gathered in a waiting room. After a few minutes one was selected and led out. That student, whom I will call the victim, was not really a test subject but had been planted in the room by the experimenters. The remaining subjects were told that they would observe the victim working at a learning task and that each time she made an incorrect response, she would receive an electric shock. The experimenter adjusted some knobs said to control the shock levels, and then a video monitor was turned on. The subjects watched as the victim entered an adjoining room, was strapped to a「shock apparatus,」and then attempted to learn pairs of nonsense syllables.

During the task the victim received several apparently painful electric shocks for her incorrect responses. She reacted with exclamations of pain and suffering. In reality the victim was acting, and what played on the monitor was a prerecorded tape. At first, as expected, most of the observers reported being extremely upset by their peer's unjust suffering. But as the experiment continued, their sympathy for the victim began to erode. Eventually the observers, powerless to help, instead began to denigrate the victim. The more the victim suffered, the lower their opinion of her became. As Lerner had predicted, the observers had a need to understand the situation in terms of cause and effect. To be certain that some other dynamic wasn't really at work, the experiment was repeated with other groups of subjects, who were told that the victim would be well compensated for her pain. In other words, these subjects believed that the victim was being「fairly」treated but were otherwise exposed to the same scenario. Those observers did not develop a tendency to think poorly of the victim. We unfortunately seem to be unconsciously biased against those in society who come out on the bottom.

We miss the effects of randomness in life because when we assess the world, we tend to see what we expect to see. We in effect define degree of talent by degree of success and then reinforce our feelings of causality by noting the correlation. That's why although there is sometimes little difference in ability between a wildly successful person and one who is not as successful, there is usually a big difference in how they are viewed. Before Moonlighting, if you were told by the young bartender Bruce Willis that he hoped to become a film star, you would not have thought, gee, I sure am lucky to have this chance to chat one-on-one with a charismatic future celebrity, but rather you would have thought something more along the lines of yeah, well, for now just make sure not to overdo it on the vermouth. The day after the show became a hit, however, everyone suddenly viewed Bruce Willis as a star, a guy who has that something special it takes to capture viewers' hearts and imagination.

The power of expectations was dramatically illustrated in a bold experiment conducted years ago by the psychologist David L. Rosenhan.20 In that study each of eight「pseudopatients」made an appointment at one of a variety of hospitals and then showed up at the admissions office complaining that they were hearing strange voices. The pseudopatients were a varied group: three psychologists, a psychiatrist, a pediatrician, a student, a painter, and a housewife. Other than alleging that single symptom and reporting false names and vocations, they all described their lives with complete honesty. Confident in the clockwork operation of our mental health system, some of the subjects later reported having feared that their obvious sanity would be immediately sniffed out, causing great embarrassment on their part. They needn't have worried. All but one were admitted to the hospital with a diagnosis of schizophrenia. The remaining patient was admitted with a diagnosis of manic-depressive psychosis.

Upon admission, they all ceased simulating any symptoms of abnormality and reported that the voices were gone. Then, as previously instructed by Rosenhan, they waited for the staff to notice that they were not, in fact, insane. None of the staff noticed. Instead, the hospital workers interpreted the pseudopatients' behavior through the lens of insanity. When one patient was observed writing in his diary, it was noted in the nursing record that「patient engages in writing behavior,」identifying the writing as a sign of mental illness. When another patient had an outburst while being mistreated by an attendant, the behavior was also assumed to be part of the patient's pathology. Even the act of arriving at the cafeteria before it opened for lunch was seen as a symptom of insanity. Other patients, unimpressed by formal medical diagnoses, would regularly challenge the pseudopatients with comments like「You're not crazy. You're a journalist…you're checking up on the hospital.」The pseudopatients' doctors, however, wrote notes like「This white 39-year-old male…manifests a long history of considerable ambivalence in close relationships, which begins in early childhood. A warm relationship with his mother cools during adolescence. A distant relationship with his father is described as being very intense.」

The good news is that despite their suspicious habits of writing and showing up early for lunch, the pseudopatients were judged not to be a danger to themselves or others and released after an average stay of nineteen days. The hospitals never detected the ruse and, when later informed of what had gone on, denied that such a scenario could be possible.

If it is easy to fall victim to expectations, it is also easy to exploit them. That is why struggling people in Hollywood work hard to look as though they are not struggling, why doctors wear white coats and place all manner of certificates and degrees on their office walls, why used-car salesmen would rather repair blemishes on the outside of a car than sink money into engine work, and why teachers will, on average, give a higher grade to a homework assignment turned in by an「excellent」student than to identical work turned in by a「weak」one.21 Marketers also know this and design ad campaigns to create and then exploit our expectations. One arena in which that was done very effectively is the vodka market. Vodka is a neutral spirit, distilled, according to the U.S. government definition,「as to be without distinctive character, aroma, taste or color.」Most American vodkas originate, therefore, not with passionate, flannel-shirted men like those who create wines, but with corporate giants like the agrochemical supplier Archer Daniels Midland. And the job of the vodka distiller is not to nurture an aging process that imparts finely nuanced flavor but to take the 190-proof industrial swill such suppliers provide, add water, and subtract as much of the taste as possible. Through massive image-building campaigns, however, vodka producers have managed to create very strong expectations of difference. As a result, people believe that this liquor, which by its very definition is without a distinctive character, actually varies greatly from brand to brand. Moreover, they are willing to pay large amounts of money based on those differences. Lest I be dismissed as a tasteless boor, I wish to point out that there is a way to test my ravings. You could line up a series of vodkas and a series of vodka sophisticates and perform a blind tasting. As it happens, The New York Times did just that.22 And without their labels, fancy vodkas like Grey Goose and Ketel One didn't fare so well. Compared with conventional wisdom, in fact, the results appeared random. Moreover, of the twenty-one vodkas tasted, it was the cheap bar brand, Smirnoff, that came out at the top of the list. Our assessment of the world would be quite different if all our judgments could be insulated from expectation and based only on relevant data.

A FEW YEARS AGO The Sunday Times of London conducted an experiment. Its editors submitted typewritten manuscripts of the opening chapters of two novels that had won the Booker Prize — one of the world's most prestigious and most influential awards for contemporary fiction — to twenty major publishers and agents.23 One of the novels was In a Free State by V. S. Naipaul, who won the Nobel Prize for Literature; the other was Holiday by Stanley Middleton. One can safely assume that each of the recipients of the manuscripts would have heaped praise on the highly lauded novels had they known what they were reading. But the submissions were made as if they were the work of aspiring authors, and none of the publishers or agents appeared to recognize them. How did the highly successful works fare? All but one of the replies were rejections. The exception was an expression of interest in Middleton's novel by a London literary agent. The same agent wrote of Naipaul's book,「We…thought it was quite original. In the end though I'm afraid we just weren't quite enthusiastic enough to be able to offer to take things further.」

The author Stephen King unwittingly conducted a similar experiment when, worried that the public would not accept his books as quickly as he could churn them out, he wrote a series of novels under the pseudonym Richard Bachman. Sales figures indicated that even Stephen King, without the name, is no Stephen King. (Sales picked up considerably after word of the author's true identity finally got out.) Sadly, one experiment King did not perform was the opposite: to swathe wonderful unpublished manuscripts by struggling writers in covers naming him as the author. But if even Stephen King, without the name, is no Stephen King, then the rest of us, when our creative work receives a less-than-Kingly reception, might take comfort in knowing that the differences in quality might not be as great as some people would have us believe.

Years ago at Caltech, I had an office around the corner from the office of a physicist named John Schwarz. He was getting little recognition and had suffered a decade of ridicule as he almost single-handedly kept alive a discredited theory, called string theory, which predicted that space has many more dimensions than the three we observe. Then one day he and a co-worker made a technical breakthrough, and for reasons that need not concern us here, suddenly the extra dimensions sounded more acceptable. String theory has been the hottest thing in physics ever since. Today John is considered one of the brilliant elder statesmen of physics, yet had he let the years of obscurity get to him, he would have been a testament to Thomas Edison's observation that「many of life's failures are people who did not realize how close they were to success when they gave up.」24

Another physicist I knew had a story that was strikingly similar to John's. He was, coincidentally, John's PhD adviser at the University of California, Berkeley. Considered one of the most brilliant scientists of his generation, this physicist was a leader in an area of research called S-matrix theory. Like John, he was stubbornly persistent and continued to work on his theory for years after others had given up. But unlike John, he did not succeed. And because of his lack of success he ended his career with many people thinking him a crackpot. But in my opinion both he and John were brilliant physicists with the courage to work — with no promise of an imminent breakthrough — on a theory that had gone out of style. And just as authors should be judged by their writing and not their books' sales, so physicists — and all who strive to achieve — should be judged more by their abilities than by their success.

The cord that tethers ability to success is both loose and elastic. It is easy to see fine qualities in successful books or to see unpublished manuscripts, inexpensive vodkas, or people struggling in any field as somehow lacking. It is easy to believe that ideas that worked were good ideas, that plans that succeeded were well designed, and that ideas and plans that did not were ill conceived. And it is easy to make heroes out of the most successful and to glance with disdain at the least. But ability does not guarantee achievement, nor is achievement proportional to ability. And so it is important to always keep in mind the other term in the equation — the role of chance.

It is no tragedy to think of the most successful people in any field as superheroes. But it is a tragedy when a belief in the judgment of experts or the marketplace rather than a belief in ourselves causes us to give up, as John Kennedy Toole did when he committed suicide after publishers repeatedly rejected his manuscript for the posthumously best-selling Confederacy of Dunces. And so when tempted to judge someone by his or her degree of success, I like to remind myself that were they to start over, Stephen King might be only a Richard Bachman and V. S. Naipaul just another struggling author, and somewhere out there roam the equals of Bill Gates and Bruce Willis and Roger Maris who are not rich and famous, equals on whom Fortune did not bestow the right breakthrough product or TV show or year. What I've learned, above all, is to keep marching forward because the best news is that since chance does play a role, one important factor in success is under our control: the number of at bats, the number of chances taken, the number of opportunities seized. For even a coin weighted toward failure will sometimes land on success. Or as the IBM pioneer Thomas Watson said,「If you want to succeed, double your failure rate.」

I have tried in this book to present the basic concepts of randomness, to illustrate how they apply to human affairs, and to present my view that its effects are largely overlooked in our interpretations of events and in our expectations and decisions. It may come as an epiphany merely to recognize the ubiquitous role of random processes in our lives; the true power of the theory of random processes, however, lies in the fact that once we understand the nature of random processes, we can alter the way we perceive the events that happen around us.

The psychologist David Rosenhan wrote that「once a person is abnormal, all of his other behaviors and characteristics are colored by that label.」25 The same applies for stardom, for many other labels of success, and for those of failure. We judge people and initiatives by their results, and we expect events to happen for good, understandable reasons. But our clear visions of inevitability are often only illusions. I wrote this book in the belief that we can reorganize our thinking in the face of uncertainty. We can improve our skill at decision making and tame some of the biases that lead us to make poor judgments and poor choices. We can seek to understand people's qualities or the qualities of a situation quite apart from the results they attain, and we can learn to judge decisions by the spectrum of potential outcomes they might have produced rather than by the particular result that actually occurred.

My mother always warned me not to think I could predict or control the future. She once related the incident that converted her to that belief. It concerned her sister, Sabina, of whom she still often speaks although it has been over sixty-five years since she last saw her. Sabina was seventeen. My mother, who idolized her as younger siblings sometimes do their older siblings, was fifteen. The Nazis had invaded Poland, and my father, from the poor section of town, had joined the underground and, as I said earlier, eventually ended up in Buchenwald. My mother, who didn't know him then, came from the wealthy part of town and ended up in a forced-labor camp. There she was given the job of nurse's aide and took care of patients suffering from typhus. Food was scarce, and random death was always near. To help protect my mother from the ever-present dangers, Sabina agreed to a plan. She had a friend who was a member of the Jewish police, a group, generally despised by the inmates, who carried out the Germans' commands and helped keep order in the camp. Sabina's friend had offered to marry her — a marriage in name only — so that Sabina might obtain the protections that his position afforded. Sabina, thinking those protections would extend to my mother, agreed. For a while it worked. Then something happened, and the Nazis soured on the Jewish police. They sent a number of officers to the gas chambers, along with their spouses — including Sabina's husband and Sabina herself. My mother has lived now for many more years without Sabina than she had lived with her, but Sabina's death still haunts her. My mother worries that when she is gone, there will no longer be any trace that Sabina ever existed. To her this story shows that it is pointless to make plans. I do not agree. I believe it is important to plan, if we do so with our eyes open. But more important, my mother's experience has taught me that we ought to identify and appreciate the good luck that we have and recognize the random events that contribute to our success. It has taught me, too, to accept the chance events that may cause us grief. Most of all it has taught me to appreciate the absence of bad luck, the absence of events that might have brought us down, and the absence of the disease, war, famine, and accident that have not — or have not yet — befallen us.

### Notes

1 Pierre-Simon de Laplace, quoted in Stigler, Statistics on the Table, p. 56.

2 James Gleick, Chaos: Making a New Science (New York: Penguin, 1987); see chap. 1.

3 Max Born, Natural Philosophy of Cause and Chance (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1948), p. 47. Born was referring to nature in general and quantum theory in particular.

4 The Pearl Harbor analysis is from Roberta Wohlstetter, Pearl Harbor: Warning and Decision (Palo Alto, Calif.: Stanford University Press, 1962).

5 Richard Henry Tawney, The Agrarian Problem in the Sixteenth Century (1912; repr., New York: Burt Franklin, 1961).

6 Wohlstetter, Pearl Harbor, p. 387.

7 The description of the events at Three Mile Island is from Charles Perrow, Normal Accidents: Living with High-Risk Technologies (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1999); and U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission,「Fact Sheet on the Three Mile Island Accident,」http://www.nrc.gov/reading-rm/doc-collections/fact-sheets/3mile-isle.htm.

8 Perrow, Normal Accidents.

9 W. Brian Arthur,「Positive Feedbacks in the Economy,」Scientific American, February 1990, pp. 92–99.

10 Matthew J. Salganik, Peter Sheridan Dodds, and Duncan J. Watts,「Experimental Study of Inequality and Unpredictability in an Artificial Cultural Market,」Science 311 (February 10, 2006); and Duncan J. Watts,「Is Justin Timberlake a Product of Cumulative Advantage?」New York Times Magazine, April 15, 2007.

11 Mlodinow,「Meet Hollywood's Latest Genius.」

12 John Steele Gordon and Michael Maiello,「Pioneers Die Broke,」Forbes, December 23, 2002; and「The Man Who Could Have Been Bill Gates,」BusinessWeek, October 25, 2004.

13 Floyd Norris,「Trump Deal Fails, and Shares Fall Again,」New York Times, July 6, 2007.

14 Melvin J. Lerner and Leo Montada,「An Overview: Advances in Belief in a Just World Theory and Methods,」in Responses to Victimizations and Belief in a Just World, ed. Leo Montada and Melvin J. Lerner (New York: Plenum Press, 1998), pp. 1–7.

15 Melvin J. Lerner,「Evaluation of Performance as a Function of Performer's Reward and Attractiveness,」Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 1 (1965): 355–60.

16 Melvin J. Lerner and C. H. Simmons,「Observer's Reactions to the ‘Innocent Victim': Compassion or Rejection?」Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 4 (1966): 203–10.

17 Lerner,「Evaluation of Performance as a Function of Performer's Reward and Attractiveness.」

18 Wendy Jean Harrod,「Expectations from Unequal Rewards,」Social Psychology Quarterly 43, no. 1 (March 1980): 126–30; Penni A. Stewart and James C. Moore Jr.,「Wage Disparities and Performance Expectations,」Social Psychology Quarterly 55, no. 1 (March 1992): 78–85; and Karen S. Cook,「Expectations, Evaluations and Equity,」American Sociological Review 40, no. 3 (June 1975): 372–88.

19 Lerner and Simmons,「Observer's Reactions to the ‘Innocent Victim.'」

20 David L. Rosenhan,「On Being Sane in Insane Places,」Science 179 (January 19, 1973): 237–55.

21 Elisha Y. Babad,「Some Correlates of Teachers' Expectancy Bias,」American Educational Research Journal 22, no. 2 (Summer 1985): 175–83.

22 Eric Asimov,「Spirits of the Times: A Humble Old Label Ices Its Rivals,」New York Times, January 26, 2005.

23 Jonathan Calvert and Will Iredale,「Publishers Toss Booker Winners into the Reject Pile,」London Sunday Times, January 1, 2006.

24 Peter Doskoch,「The Winning Edge,」Psychology Today, November/ December 2005, p. 44.

25 Rosenhan,「On Being Sane in Insane Places,」p. 243.

1001醉汉的脚步

1814 年，牛顿物理学差不多正处于成功的巅峰。在这一年，拉普拉斯写道：

假如一个智能体，在一个给定的时刻，知道了所有使世界运行的力，以及世界的每一个组成体的位置；进一步地，如果该智能体足够强大，以至能对这些数据进行分析，它就可以用同一个方程将宇宙中最大之天体及最小之原子的运动皆囊括其中：对于这个智能体而言，没有什么是不确定的，而未来就如同过去一样，呈现在它的眼前。

拉普拉斯表达的这种观点叫「决定论」：世界的当前状态，精确地决定了它未来的发展方向。

如果将决定论应用到我们的日常生活中，那么它意味着我们将生活在这样一个世界，在这个世界上，个人的素质以及任何形势或环境的性质，都将以直接而毫不含糊的方式导致精准的后果。这是一个有序的世界，其中的任何事情都能被预见，并能通过计算求得。但拉普拉斯的梦想要成真，必须满足几个条件。首先，自然定律本身必须能够给出一个确定的未来，而且我们必须掌握这些定律。其次，我们必须获得那些完全描述了我们感兴趣的系统的数据，而且不允许有任何不可预见的因素。最后，我们必须有足够的智慧或计算能力，能根据已知的数据描述现在的数据，能通过定律计算它所确定的未来是何等模样。在本书中，我们已经审视了许多有助于理解随机现象的概念。一路走来，我们已经对生活中的许多具体情境有了深入的了解。然而，我们还需要看到事物的全貌，也就是随机性到底在多大程度上造就了我们在生命中所处的位置，而当我们去预测前进的方向时，我们的预测又能做到多好？

从文艺复兴晚期到维多利亚时代，许多学者在对人类社会进行的研究中抱持着与拉普拉斯相同的决定论信念。他们或者像高尔顿那样认为人的生命历程是由个人素质严格确定的，或者像凯特勒那样相信社会的未来是可以预测的。牛顿物理学的成功，使他们相信人类行为是能够被可靠预言的，就像其他自然现象能够被预言一样。在他们看来，日常世界的未来就像行星的轨道，应当能够由当前的事件状态严格确定，这一点似乎再合理不过了。

20 世纪 60 年代，一位名叫爱德华·洛伦兹的气象学家，想利用当时的最新科技，也就是一台原始计算机，在气象研究这个有限的领域内实践一下拉普拉斯的观念。根据拉普拉斯相信的决定论世界观，如果洛伦兹将他那个理想地球在某个特定时刻的大气状况数据，输入一台噪声不断的计算机，计算机就会利用已知的气象学定律，计算和打印出一行行表示未来天气状况的数字。

一天，洛伦兹决定将手头这个特定的模拟扩展到未来，他打算偷懒抄条近路，因此没有完整重复计算过程，而是把运行到一半时的结果作为初始条件，开始运行新的模拟。于是他把之前打印出来的中间模拟结果作为新模拟的初始数据，送进计算机的输入设备，并期望计算机再度出现之前模拟结果的剩余部分，并进一步求出更加遥远的未来的模拟结果。但和他预期的情况不同，他注意到一件很奇怪的事情：新模拟中的天气演化，与旧模拟的结果完全不同。新模拟没能重复旧模拟在剩余时间段内的结果，反而严重偏离了该结果。很快，他就意识到造成这一偏离的原因：在计算机内存中，数据的存储精度是小数点后六位，而打印出的结果，只保留到小数点后三位。这样一来，他用作新模拟初始条件的数据，就与旧模拟的相应数据存在着微小的差别。例如，0.293416 这个值被打印出来时，就变成了 0.293。

科学家通常都会假设，如果某系统的初始条件发生了很小的变化，那么系统的演化过程同样只会发生很小的变化。不管怎样，收集天气数据的卫星在测量各种参数时，也只能达到小数点后两位或三位的精度，因此它们不可能发觉 0.293416 和 0.293 之间那细微的差别。但洛伦兹发现，这微小的差别可以导致结果的巨大改变。这种现象被称为「蝴蝶效应」，其名称的来由，是指一只蝴蝶扇动翅膀所造成的大气状况的些微改变，可能会在之后的全球天气模式中造成巨大影响。这个观点听起来十分荒谬。这不就等于说某天早上你多喝了一杯咖啡，也将对你的生活产生深远的影响吗？但事实上，这种事的确会发生。比如这额外的时间使你在火车站与未来的妻子偶遇，或者使你刚好避开一辆加速闯红灯的汽车。实际上，洛伦兹的故事本身，就是蝴蝶效应的一个例子：要不是他决定用这种抄小路的方式延长模拟时间，他就不会发现将带来一个全新的数学领域的蝴蝶效应。在回顾生命中那些重大事件的细节时，我们不难发现这类看似无足轻重却导致巨大改变的随机事件的存在。

1-3『洛伦兹的这个例子记得在书籍「复杂」里看到过，「混沌」系统往往符合蝴蝶效应。（2021-03-01）』

与人类自身和人类社会有关的决定论，无法满足那些拉普拉斯暗指的可预测性所需的条件。之所以如此，原因有以下几点。首先，就目前所知，人类社会不像物理学那样，由明确而基本的定律主宰。恰恰相反，人类的行为正如卡尼曼和特沃斯基一再证明的那样，不仅无法预测，而且（从行为违背自身最大利益的意义上来说）常常是非理性的。其次，即使我们能够像凯特勒所希望的那样，发现主宰人类活动的定律，我们也不可能精确获知或控制生活中的各种因素。也就是说，我们跟洛伦兹一样，无法得到预测所需的精确数据。第三，与人有关的事情是如此复杂，因此，哪怕我们真的了解了这些定律，获取了这些数据，能否完成必要的计算也是存疑的。因此，决定论对于人类活动而言，是一个很糟糕的模型。或者按诺贝尔奖获得者马克斯·玻恩的话来说：「相比于因果性，偶然性是一个更加基本的概念。」

醉汉的脚步是随机过程的科学研究中所使用的一个基本模型。不过它同样为我们的日常生活提供了合适的模型，因为就像悬浮在布朗流体中的花粉微粒那样，我们也不断地被随机事件推动，先是走向这个方向，然后又通往那个方向。虽然我们在社会学数据中可以发现统计规律，但是对于某个具体的个人而言，未来仍然是无法预测的。对于某个具体的成就、工作、朋友或财政状况等，机遇所占的功劳比许多人能认识到的还要大。接下来，我将进一步说明，现实生活中除了一些最简单的情势，我们都无法躲开那些不可预见或无法预测的力量。正是这些随机力量的影响，以及我们对它们做出的反应，塑造了我们大部分的生命之路。不过作为一个开头，我会探讨一个明显与上述观点相矛盾的问题：如果未来果真一片混沌而无法预测，那么为什么有很多事情，我们在事后回顾时，却常常觉得这些后果好像是应该可以预见的？

1941 年秋，在日本人袭击珍珠港的几个月前，东京的情报机关给在檀香山的间谍发去一个令人不安的命令。美军截获了这个命令，并把它送到海军情报局。在官僚作风满满的处理程序之后，已解密和翻译好的情报于 10 月 9 日被送抵华盛顿。这个命令要求檀香山的日本情报人员将珍珠港划分为 5 个区域，并按区域报告在港舰艇，特别是战列舰、驱逐舰与航空母舰以及同一船坞停靠多艘舰船的情况。几周后，另一件古怪的事情发生了：美国的监听人员无法跟踪到日军第一、第二舰队所有已知航母的无线电通信，对它们的位置也一无所知。然后在 12 月初，位于夏威夷的第 14 海军辖区战斗情报单位报告，日本人在一个月内第二次更改了舰艇呼号。如 WCBS 或 KNPR 这样的呼号是用来标识无线电通信源的，在战争时期，它们不但能使友方，也能使敌方发现舰只的身份，因此这些呼号总是被周期性地更换。日军的习惯是每 6 个月或更长时间更换一次呼号，而在 30 天中更换两次呼号，就被视作「大规模主动行动准备工作中的一个步骤」。这一改变使得接下来的几天确认日军航母和潜艇的位置变得更加困难，也让之前的无线电静默变得更令人困惑。

两天后，发送到日本驻香港、新加坡、巴达维亚、马尼拉、华盛顿和伦敦外交与领事机构的密电被截获并破解。这些消息要求外交官们立即销毁密码本，并烧掉其他所有重要的机密与秘密文件。同时，FBI 也截获到一个由日本驻夏威夷领事馆的厨师打给身在檀香山的某人的电话，厨师兴奋地告诉对方，官员们正在烧毁所有重要文件。陆军情报部门主管助理比克内尔中校带着一份截获的消息，来到当时正准备与陆军夏威夷部负责人共进晚餐的顶头上司面前。这时已是 12 月 6 日星期六，即攻击前一天的下午接近傍晚的时候了。这些事后看来如此有预示性的事情，为何未能让那些与此事利益攸关的人意识到敌军的进攻正在逼近呢？

在一个复杂的事件链条中，每个事件的发展都带有一定的不确定性。因此，一种根本的不对称性就存在于过去与未来之间。自从玻尔兹曼决定对流体性质的分子过程进行统计分析（见第 8 章）以来，这种不对称性就一直是科学研究的对象。设想浮在一杯水中的一个染料分子。这个分子将如同布朗的花粉微粒那样，迈着醉汉的步伐前进。但即使是这种无目的性的运动，也会产生某个方向上的位移。如果等上比如 3 小时，这个分子通常将离开其最初位置约 1 英寸。假设在某个时间点上，分子移动到某个显眼的位置，并最终吸引了我们的注意，那么正如许多人在珍珠港事件之后所做的那样，我们可能会去寻找这个出乎意料的事件的成因。现在假定我们能够深挖这个分子的历史，跟踪其所有的碰撞记录，那么我们的确可以发现，这个或那个水分子的碰撞，推动着染料分子沿着它那曲曲折折的道路前进。换句话说，我们在事后可以清楚地解释，为什么这个染料分子的过去是以这种确定的方式发展的。但水中还有许多其他的水分子，它们也有可能与染料分子相互作用。要在实际发生之前预测染料分子的路线，需要计算所有那些具有潜在重要性的水分子的路线和它们的相互作用，而这需要几乎无法想象的巨大的计算量。相较于解释过去所需要的那张碰撞清单，预测的计算规模和难度要高出许多。因此，要在实际发生前预测染料分子的运动，几乎是不可能的，哪怕这个运动相对而言在事后更容易解释一些。

我们总是能在日常生活中发现许多看似十分明显，事先却无法预测的事情，这种根本的不对称性就是原因。所以天气预报员能告诉你，因为三天前冷空气前锋这么运动而昨天暖空气前锋那么移动，所以你那浪漫的室外婚礼就碰到了下雨天。但如果要事先了解这些冷暖空气在今后三天是如何运动的，并提醒你为婚礼准备一顶大帐篷，这位天气预报员所做的就远不如前者成功了。我们再来看看国际象棋比赛。与纸牌不同，国际象棋中并没有直接的随机因素，但其中同样存在不确定性，因为比赛双方都不能确定地知道，对手的下一步将怎么走。如果双方都是高手，那么在大多数的回合中，他们还有可能预见接下来的几步棋会怎么走，但是如果再多想几步，不确定性就会掺和进来，让棋局的发展变得无法预测。但另一方面，我们通常能够很容易在事后指出每名棋手走出每步棋的原因。国际象棋同样是一个过往易懂但未来难测的随机过程。

上述情况在股票市场中也一样。比如基金的业绩表现。如第 9 章提到的，选择基金时，我们常常会参考它们之前的表现。确实，在之前的表现中，我们可以轻易地发现干脆又漂亮的模式。例如，图 10-1 就绘出了 800 名基金经理在 1991 年到 1995 年 5 年间的表现。

图 10-1 1991-1995 年，最佳基金的业绩排名图

纵轴标出的是各基金相对于所有基金平均收益的盈亏，换言之，收益为 0 表示该基金的业绩与所有基金 5 年间的平均业绩持平。横轴标出的则是基金经理的相对排名，从第 1 名到第 800 名。如果我们要看看这 5 年中排名第 100 的基金经理的业绩，那么在横轴为 100 的地方能读到这个数据。

毫无疑问，任何分析家都能找到一系列令人信服的理由，说明图中那些业绩领先的经理为何会成功，垫底的经理为何会失败，曲线为什么就该是这个样子。不管投资者会不会花时间去了解这些分析的细节，他们都不会选一只过去 5 年的业绩比平均水平低 10% 的基金，而肯定会选一只比平均水平高 10% 的基金。回顾过去，我们能轻易构造出这样漂亮的图形和直截了当的解释。但这个再符合逻辑不过的图，却不过是马后炮造成的错觉，它与预测未来几乎扯不上什么关系。在图 10-2 中，我将同样的基金再次进行了比较，其中横轴仍然按之前 5 年的排名排列，而纵轴表示它们在接下来 5 年中的业绩。也就是说，我保持了 1991-1995 年的排名，但显示了基金在 1996-2000 年实现的收益。如果过去的表现可以很好地预测未来，那么这些基金在 1991-1995 年以及 1996-2000 年，其相对业绩多少应该表现出一些一致性。也就是说，如果赢家（图的左边）依旧比别人干得好，而输家（图的右边）依旧干得很差，那么这张图应该与上一张图差不多完全相同。但正如该图所示，当我们把过去的那个秩序外推到将来时，这个秩序就解体了，而新图形看起来跟随机噪声差不多。

偶然性在投资以及如股权基金经理米勒这类人在成功中所扮演的角色，被人们以一种系统性的方式遗漏了，与此同时，我们却总是毫无根据地相信，过去的错误必定是无知或无能的结果，而我们只要多多学习，提高我们的洞察力，就可以纠正这一点。这也是为什么在 2007 年的春天，当美林证券的股价在 95 美元左右时，它的首席执行官奥尼尔被认为是个冒险的天才，而到了 2007 年秋天证券市场崩溃后，他就被嘲笑为不计后果的鲁莽牛仔，并很快被炒了鱿鱼。我们条件反射式地对商业显贵、政治家与演员中的超级巨星以及任何坐着私人飞机飞来飞去的家伙表示尊敬，好像他们的成就是他们身上的什么特有素质的必然反映，而那些不得不吞下经济舱飞行餐的人是不会拥有这样的素质的。政治领域的专家、金融专家和商业顾问这类人，他们总是声称以往的记录就代表着专业水平，而我们对他们做出的精确过头的预测，投入的信心也是过头了。

图 10-2 1991-1995 年的最佳基金在 1996-2000 年的业绩

我熟知的一家大型出版公司，有一次要给它的教育软件部制订一年、三年与五年计划。在这个过程中，它碰到了相当棘手的问题。公司有高薪聘请的顾问，有冗长的市场调研会议，有熬夜进行的金融分析讨论会，还有长时间在外召开的午后会议。终于，所有人的种种预感被写成公式，公式算出了结果，这些结果则精确到小数点后好几位，而公司疯狂的猜想现在也变成了实现的可能性比较大的预期。在计划执行的第一年里，如果某些产品卖得不及预期，或者另一些产品卖得比预期要好，那么大家总是能找到之所以好或不好的理由，并归功或归咎于相应人等，好像那些预期真有什么意义似的。到了第二年，市场上的两个竞争对手发起了一系列该公司未预见的价格战。再过一年，教育软件市场彻底崩溃了。当不确定因素插手到计划实施中时，那个三年计划其实根本没有成功的机会。至于那个被精雕细琢打磨得有如钻石的五年计划则更走运些，没有人会麻烦它出来与实际结果进行任何比较，因为五年之后，那个部门差不多所有人都跳了槽。

对于本身的专业就是研究过去的历史学家来说，他们对于事件是遵循可预测的方式发展的观点，也抱持着与科学家同样的警惕态度。实际上，必然性错觉在历史研究中有着严重的后果，而对于必然性错觉的态度，也成为保守的历史学家与社会主义历史学家达成共识的少数事情之一。例如社会主义历史学家托尼就说过：「历史学家们给出了一种必然性的说法…… 把获胜的力量推到显赫的地位上，把那些被它们吞噬的力量扔到角落里。」而曾被里根授予总统自由勋章的历史学家沃尔斯泰特则这样说：「当然，各种信号在事后看来，总是非常清晰；我们可以看到它预示的究竟是怎样的灾难…… 但在事前，它却晦涩朦胧，并有着相互矛盾的含义。」

从某种意义上说，世事难料的观念从来都被包装在「事后诸葛亮」这样的俗语中，但人们实际的行为表现，却又好像在说这句话根本是错的。在每个悲剧发生之后，「你们早该知道它会发生」这样的问责游戏就会在政府上演。在珍珠港（以及 9·11 恐怖袭击事件）的例子中，当我们回过头看那些攻击前所发生的事情，它们似乎都指向一个显然的方向。但正如在染料分子、天气与国际象棋的例子中那样，如果我们在事前跟踪局势的发展，这种必然感很快就消失无踪了。首先，除了我提到的那些情报，还有海量的无用情报。这类新情报或新报告，一周下来都堆成山了。这些消息有时候好像是一种警讯，有时候又充满神秘感，不过后来都被证明具有误导性或毫无重要性。即使我们将注意力集中在事后证明是重要的报告上，在袭击发生前，每份这样的报告也都存在着不同的合理解释，并不能说明针对珍珠港的偷袭已经在进行了。例如，那个将珍珠港分为 5 个区域的命令，与其他被发往驻巴拿马、温哥华、旧金山和俄勒冈州波特兰的日本情报人员手中的命令，都是相似的。至于失去无线电监测也并非前所未有的事，这种情况过去常常意味着战舰正停泊在本土港口，因此它们之间的通信是利用陆上电缆收发电报进行的。更重要的是，即使相信战争的扩大已经迫在眉睫，却有许多信息表明袭击会发生在别处 —— 例如菲律宾群岛、马来半岛或关岛。在珍珠港的例子中，让我们的注意力发生偏向的因素，其数量肯定没有染料分子所碰到的水分子多，但已足够使未来的清晰图景变得模糊不清。

在珍珠港事件之后，美国国会的 7 个委员会开始不断钻研，以求发现军方忽略所有那些表明攻击即将到来的「信号」的原因。作为军方一员的陆军参谋长马歇尔，因为一份 1941 年 5 月致罗斯福总统的备忘录而招致强烈的批评。该备忘录称「由于其防御工事、驻军以及自然条件，我们相信瓦胡岛是世界上最为坚固的堡垒」，并再次使总统确信，如果敌人来袭，敌方将「在距目标 200 英里的范围内…… 被各式各样的弹雨」阻截。马歇尔将军不是笨蛋，不过他手上当然也没有能够预测未来的水晶球。随机性研究告诉我们，如水晶球般清澈的事件场景是可能出现的，但不幸的是，这种场景只会在事后出现。因此，我们相信我们知道一部影片表现不错，一名候选人赢得了选举，一场风暴即将来袭，一只股票价格下跌，一支足球队输了比赛，一种新产品在市场上大败，或者一种疾病开始恶化等种种事情的成因。可一旦面临预测一部影片是否会表现不错，一名候选人是否会赢得选举，一场风暴是否会来袭，一只股票价格是否会下跌，一支足球队是否会输掉比赛，一种新产品是否会在市场上遭遇失败或一种疾病是否会恶化等问题时，我们的这种能力几乎无能为力。就预测而言，这个所谓能力实际上什么都不是。

我们当然可以很容易地编出故事来解释过去，或者让自己对不确定的未来发展充满信心。我们也用不着因为这些做法存在陷阱，就把它们彻底扔到一边。不过，我们可以努力增强自己对直觉式错误的免疫力。我们可以学会用怀疑的眼光看待解释和预言；我们可以更注重对事件做出反应的素质，如灵活性、信心、勇气与坚毅等品质，而不是依赖于对事件是否发生的预测能力；我们可以更看重直接的第一印象，而非那些被大肆宣扬的当年之勇。通过这些途径，我们可以避免在机械决定论的框架内形成我们的判断。

1979 年 3 月，还发生了一连串事件，其中的种种出乎意料地让这一连串事件名声大噪。这回的事情发生在宾夕法尼亚州的一个核电站中。事情的结局是核反应堆的堆芯部分熔毁，并有可能向周边环境释放出超警戒水平剂量的辐射。灾难是这样开始的：有大约一杯左右的水，在一个被称为精处理器的水过滤器中，从密封处渗漏出来，并流入驱动电厂某些仪器的一个气动系统，这导致两个阀门出现故障。这些出故障的阀门切断了电厂蒸汽发电机组的冷水供应 —— 而该蒸汽发电机组正是负责带走核反应堆堆芯处所产生的热量的系统。之后紧急水泵启动，它的两路管道上各有一个阀门，但在两天前的维修工作结束之后，它们仍然被设置在关闭状态。因此，水泵只是徒劳地将水打进死胡同。此外，某个减压阀门未能正常工作，而控制室里本应显示该阀门状态的仪表同时发生了故障。

如果我们现在单独看这些故障中的任何一个，会发现它们其实都属于常见也可以接受的情况。精处理器故障在这个电厂不是什么稀罕事，通常也不是什么大问题；核电站中有成百的阀门有规律地打开和关闭，其中一些被设置在错误的状态，这既不罕见，也不值得担心太多；而那个减压阀的不可靠，本来就是大家都知道的事，而且，至少这一款减压阀在 11 个其他电站中也不时发生故障，却没有造成严重后果。不过所有这些故障凑到一起，整个电站就像是由启斯东警察在打理一样。因此，紧随三英里岛上这场事故发生的，就是众多的调查和非难，以及一个完全不同类型的后果。耶鲁大学的社会学家查尔斯·佩罗受到引起事故的那一连串事件的启发，建立了一个新的意外事故的理论，其中就给出了本章的中心论点：我们应当能够预料到，复杂系统（我将生活也算在内）中那些通常被忽略不计的次要因素，会由于偶然性，而在某些时候导致重大事件的发生。

佩罗认识到现代系统都是由数以千计的部分组成的，其中还包括可能出错的人类决策者。这些组成部分相互联系在一起，但这些联系如同拉普拉斯的原子那样无法被单独跟踪和预测。但我愿意打赌，正如那迈着醉汉步伐行走的原子最终将到达某个位置一样，事故也将不可避免地发生。佩罗这个被称为「事故常态理论」的学说，描述了事故是如何发生的，哪怕事故看起来并没有明确的原因，也没有公司或政府调查组织所希望找到的明显的错误和为之负责的无能的笨蛋。尽管事故常态理论研究的是事情有时必然出错的原因，但它同样能反过来解释为什么事情有时必然成功。因为在复杂的过程中，不管失败了多少次，如果我们一直尝试，那么最终成功的机会还是不小的。实际上，W. 布莱恩·阿瑟这样的经济学家就认为，许多次要因素的同时发生，甚至可以使没有特别优势的公司压倒竞争对手。「在现实世界中，」他写道，「如果几个规模相近的公司一同进入市场，那么，小小的偶然事件，比如意外的订单、与消费者偶然的碰面、管理上的突发奇想等等，将决定哪些公司能更早获得销售收入，并通过日积月累，最终成为市场的支配力量。经济活动…… 由单独的业务决定，这些业务小到无法预见。但这些小小的‘随机’事件能（积累）堆积起来，并随着时间的流逝，以正反馈的方式得到放大。」

社会学研究者也留意到同样的现象。比如，一群研究者对被社会学家称为文化产业的书籍、电影、艺术、音乐等领域的消费者购买习惯展开了研究。这些领域的传统市场营销思路认为，我们应当预测消费者的喜好，这样就可以获得成功。如果按照这种观点，管理者最有成效的时间使用方式，就应该是去研究斯蒂芬·金、麦当娜或布鲁斯·威利斯到底为什么能够让他们的粉丝如此着迷。他们研究了过去，然后跟我说的一样，他们没费什么力气就找出成功的原因，不论他们认为的这个成功到底是什么。之后，他们希望能复制这些成功。

这就是市场中的决定论，在这种观念下，成功主要取决于某人或某产品的内在品质。但我们还能以另一种非决定论的方式看待成功。以非决定论的观点来看，世界上还有许多高质量但不为人知的书籍、歌手和演员，而真正能让这一个或那一个出头的，很大程度上是随机性与各种次要因素合谋的结果，也就是运气。根据这种观点，那些具有传统观念的行政管理人员不过是在玩轮盘赌。

多亏了互联网，这个观点已经得到验证。研究者将注意力放在销售额主要来自互联网的音乐市场。为了开展研究，他们雇用了 14341 名参与者，让他们听一些他们从未听说过的乐队演唱的 48 首歌曲，并给它们打分，如果他们愿意的话，还可以下载这些歌曲。有些参与者能够看到这些歌曲的流行程度的数据，也就是有多少参与者下载了这些歌曲。这些参与者被分到 8 个相互隔离的「世界」中，并且只能看到同一世界中的参与者下载歌曲的情况。每个乐队在每个世界中的初始下载量都为 0，之后各个世界独立演变。此外还有一个第 9 组，其中的参与者看不到任何数据。研究者用这最后一组相互隔绝的参与者给出的歌曲流行度，来定义每首歌的「固有质量」，也就是在没有外界影响的情况下，这些歌曲所具有的吸引力。

如果决定论的世界观是正确，那么在前 8 个世界中占优势的，应该是相同的歌曲，而且这 8 个世界中的歌曲排行，应该与第 9 组的孤立参与者给出的固有质量一致。但研究者发现的结果恰好相反：各首歌曲在不同世界中的受欢迎程度天差地别，而固有质量相近的不同歌曲，其受欢迎程度也相差悬殊。比如，52metro 乐队演唱的「Lockdown」，其固有质量在 48 首歌中排名第 26，但在一个世界中，它的排名为第一，而在另一个世界中，排名为第 40。在实验中，如果某首歌曲偶然地在早期获得了较多下载量，那么这首歌曲颇受欢迎的表象，会进一步影响后来的购买者。这种现象在电影产业中也广为人知：电影观众如果事前听说某部电影不错，他们通常就会表现出更多的喜好。在这个例子中，小小的随机影响产生了滚雪球效应，使歌曲的未来天差地别。我们又一次看到了蝴蝶效应。

在生活中细致观察，我们同样可以发现，如果没有那些偶遇的人、偶然到来的工作机会以及各种各样小因素的随机会合，许多重大事件的结果可能会完全不同。让我们想象一下这样一位演员，他从 20 世纪 70 年代后期开始的 7 年中，一直住在曼哈顿 59 大街一幢没有电梯的公寓的 6 楼，为着有朝一日能闯出名头而努力着。他干着些既不在百老汇也没办法进入百老汇的戏剧工作，这些工作有时离百老汇还很远。他还出演电视广告节目。总之，他用尽浑身解数希望引起别人的注意，全力打造自己的职业生涯，并赚到足够的钱能偶尔到饭店享用一餐烤牛排，而不必为了逃单偷偷摸摸地溜走。但如同许多赶超偶像的人一样，不管这名志向远大的演员怎样努力挑选恰当的角色，选择正确的交易，并尽可能地突出表现自己，他最可靠的角色，却还是酒吧招待。后来，在 1984 年夏天的某个日子，他飞到洛杉矶。他去洛杉矶的目的，要么是去观看奥林匹克运动会（如果你相信他的评传作家），要么是去拜访一位女性朋友（如果你相信《纽约时报》）。但不管哪个才是实情，有一件事却是非常明确的：拜访西海岸的这个决定，跟演出没什么关系，跟爱情（至少是对体育的热爱）倒是颇有瓜葛。但后来发生的事情证明，这是他职业生涯中做出的最好的决策，而且还很可能是他这辈子做过的最好的决定。

这个演员名叫布鲁斯·威利斯。在洛杉矶时，一名星探建议他去参加一些电视剧试演 ，其中一个试演节目已经进入最后选角的阶段。制作方当时其实已经有了一个最终入围者的名单，但是，好莱坞可没有「最终」这回事，除非是合同上的墨迹都干透了，官司也已经盖棺定论了。威利斯得到试演机会，并最终获得大卫·艾迪森这个角色 ——ABC（美国广播公司）的新节目《蓝色月光侦探社》中斯碧尔·谢波德的男搭档。

我们可能很容易想到，这一定是因为威利斯比本来排名榜首的那位 X 先生更适合这个角色。至于接下来的事情（用别人的话来说）就是历史了。我们现在当然知道《蓝色月光侦探社》和威利斯都取得了巨大成功，所以好莱坞那帮拍板的家伙在第一眼看到威利斯的时候，除了赶紧烧掉笨头笨脑的长靴来庆祝新发现的耀眼新星，并把那张现在已经被否定的最终入围者名单扔到火里，我们很难想象他们还能做些什么别的事情。不过在演员选角阶段实际发生的事情，倒更像是你让孩子们出去买 1 加仑 冰激凌，结果两个想要草莓味，第三个却想要三层巧克力法奇方块蛋糕味时的那种情形。电视台的管理人员为 X 先生而战，他们觉得威利斯看起来并不像一个严肃的主持人。《蓝色月光侦探社》的制作总监格伦·卡伦则支持威利斯。前者在事后很容易被看作无知的小丑。就我的经验而言，电视节目制作人常常都持这种意见，当这些评论不会被搞管理的人听到时更是如此。但在你认可这个想法之前，请考虑一下下面的问题：电视观众在开始时都认同管理人员的评价，他们也觉得威利斯不过是个普普通通的演员而已。《蓝色月光侦探社》于 1985 年 3 月初次亮相时，收视率很低。在整个第一季中，其表现只能说是平庸而已。只是到了第二季，观众才改变了想法，然后节目大红大紫。在威利斯突然成为一线明星之前，我们理所当然无法预见他的魅力和成功。人们现在也许会把这笔账记在疯狂的好莱坞头上，但威利斯那条通往成功的醉汉之路，却根本不是什么不寻常的事情。许多成功人士走过的，正是这样一条被众多随机影响及意料之外的结果隔成一段一段的道路。不仅他们的职业生涯是这样，他们的爱情、嗜好及友谊也是如此。实际上，这种情况更像是规律而非例外。

我最近一次看午夜节目时，在一个访谈中看到另一位明星，虽然他并非娱乐圈中人。他的名字叫比尔·盖茨。访谈节目的主持人向来以嘲讽的风格著称，但面对盖茨，他却表现出颇不寻常的恭敬，甚至连下面的听众似乎也在对盖茨大抛媚眼。之所以如此，当然是因为盖茨已连续 13 年被《福布斯》杂志评为全世界最富有的人。实际上，自创立微软公司以来，盖茨每秒钟都能赚 100 多美元。因此，当他被问及对互动电视的看法时，每个人都怀着极大的期待等待着他的演讲。但他的回答十分平庸，并不比其他一打计算机专家嘴中说出的回答更富有创意，更为独特或更具洞察力。这不禁使我们思忖：到底是因为盖茨像神一样，所以才能每秒钟赚 100 美元，还是因为他每秒钟能赚 100 美元所以才像神一样？

1980 年，一群从事某个秘密的个人计算机制造项目的 IBM（国际商业机器公司）员工，因为这个项目飞到西雅图，与这位年轻的计算机企业家见面。盖茨当时创建了一家小公司，而 IBM 需要为计划中的「家庭计算机」寻找一个被称为「操作系统」的程序。对后来发生的事情，各方的回忆有所不同，但大体上是这样的 ：盖茨说他无法提供这个操作系统，并建议 IBM 的人去找一位著名的软件程序员，数字研究公司（DRI）的加里·基尔代尔。IBM 与基尔代尔之间的商谈并不顺利。原因之一是当 IBM 的人来到数字研究公司的办公室时，基尔代尔当时的妻子也是公司的业务经理，拒绝与 IBM 签署保密协议。IBM 的使者们再次造访，而这一次，基尔代尔与他们见了面。没有人确切知道在这次会面中发生了什么，但即使在这次会谈中他们达成了一笔非正式的交易，交易后来也没能继续下去。大约在这时，IBM 的杰克·萨姆斯又碰到了盖茨。两人当时都知道，还有另一个能用的操作系统，它是基于基尔代尔的系统，或是在基尔代尔系统的启发之下做出来的，至于到底是哪一个，就看你愿意相信谁了。据萨姆斯所述，当时盖茨说道：「你想去弄……（那个操作系统）呢，还是想要我帮你弄到手？」萨姆斯显然不想被牵连在内，因此他说：「不管用什么方法，你去搞到它就成。」盖茨做到了，代价是 5 万美元（或根据某些记述，还要再多一点点），他对这个系统做了一些改动，并给它重新起了个名字叫 DOS（磁盘操作系统）。IBM 显然对自己那个家庭计算机的新点子的潜力心里没底，因此它以低廉的软件拷贝使用费，从盖茨那儿获得了使用许可，而盖茨保留了版权。DOS 并不比苹果公司的 Macintosh 这样的操作系统更好，而且还有很多人，包括大多数计算机专业人士说它比后者差很多。但增长中的 IBM 用户群，鼓励了软件开发者为 DOS 编制程序，从而刺激了潜在用户购买 IBM 的机器，反过来又激励了软件开发人员为 DOS 编制程序。换言之，正如阿瑟说的那样，人们之所以购买 IBM 的机器，是因为人们都在购买 IBM 的机器。在计算机企业界这个流体中，盖茨成为脱颖而出的那个分子。但要不是基尔代尔的不合作，IBM 的缺乏远见，以及萨姆斯与盖茨的再度会面，那么不管盖茨有多少先见之明或商业敏感性，他可能都只会成为另一个软件企业家，而不是世界上最富有的人之一。而他关于互动电视的观点不过是又一个软件企业家的观点，原因就在于此。

我们的社会能很快将富人变成英雄，把穷人变成山羊。这就是为什么房地产大亨唐纳德·特朗普在他的广场酒店破产而赌场帝国破产两次（如果有合作伙伴在 1994 年向他的赌博公司投资 1 万美元的话，13 年后，他只能揣着剩下的 636 美元离开） 之后，仍然敢于在一个颇为成功的电视节目中以明星的面目出现，并对那些怀有雄心壮志的年轻人的商业智慧评头论足。

按照与其财富成比例的方式评价人们的才智，显然很可能是个错误。我们无法看到某人的潜能，而只能看到这些潜能所带来的结果，因此我们常常认为结果必然体现能力，并因此对这个人形成错误的判断。生活的事故常态理论却证明，行动和收获之间的联系虽然并非完全随机，但随机因素的影响，却与我们本身的素质及行动同等重要。

许多人在情感上不愿意接受随机影响非常重要这个看法，哪怕他们在理智上认识到这确实就是事实。如果人们低估了机遇在那些巨头的职业生涯中所扮演的角色，那么对于机遇在最为失败的那些人的生活中所扮演的角色，我们是否同样没有给予足够的重视呢？在这个问题的推动下，社会心理学家梅尔文·勒纳在 20 世纪 60 年代考察了社会对穷人所持的负面态度。勒纳认识到，「如果人们相信在其作为和收获之间存在某种随机联系的话，就没有多少人会付出长期的努力」，因此他的结论就是，「为了让自己还保有理智」，人们高估了由成功所能推断出的潜能。也就是说，我们倾向于认为，成名的电影明星比仍在奋斗的电影明星更有天分，而世界上最富有的人也必然是最聪明的人。

我们也许不觉得自己是根据人们的收入或成功的外在表现来评判他们的。但哪怕我们明确知道一个人的薪水完全是随机确定的，也还是有许多人无法避免会直觉地认为薪水与价值有关。勒纳就考察了这个问题。他将观察者安排在一个小小的暗室中，面对一面单面透光的镜子坐着。从座位上，这些观察者能够观察一个放了一张桌子两把椅子且灯光明亮的小房间。实验者让这些观察者相信，汤姆和比尔这两名工人将很快进入房间，并一起花 15 分钟还原若干被打乱的单词。观察窗前面的窗帘此时是拉上的，而且勒纳告诉观察者，窗帘将一直保持这种状态，因为如果他们能听到但不能看到这两名工人，就可以在实验中排除由于外貌造成的影响。勒纳还告诉他们，由于经费有限，只能随机挑出一名工人付给他酬劳。勒纳离开房间后，助手打开开关，开始播放一卷录音带。这些观察者相信，他们听到了汤姆和比尔进入窗帘后的房间并开始工作。实际上，他们听到的只是汤姆和比尔朗读的一个固定剧本的录音，这个剧本经过特别设计，即使按多种客观标准来评判，人们也会觉得两个人对实验中的任务同样擅长。之后，实验要求对此毫不知情的观察者对汤姆和比尔的勤劳程度、创造性和成功程度进行评分。当汤姆被随机选为报酬获得者时，大约 90% 的观察者评判他为任务的完成做出了更多贡献；当比尔拿到钱时，则有大约 70% 的观察者持同样观点。尽管汤姆和比尔的表现相当，而且观察者也知道报酬是随机发放的，但是他们仍然认为得到报酬的工人比那个忙了半天却什么都没得到的人要好。哎，我们都太容易被某人赚到的钱愚弄了！所以才会有人把自己精心地打扮成成功人士的样子！

一系列相关研究也从这两名工人的视角探究了上述效应。人人都知道，具有适当的社会与学术资历、拥有响亮头衔及优渥收入的老板们，常常会更高地评价自己的观点，而不是下属的观点。研究者考虑的问题是，那些纯粹靠运气赚到更多钱的人，是不是也有这种想法？哪怕那些「成功」是不劳而获的，是否也在慢慢地向他们灌输一种高人一等的感觉？为了找到答案，研究者让若干对儿志愿者在很多无意义的任务中相互配合。例如在一项任务中，实验将短暂地显示一幅黑白图像，而受试者需要确定，图像的上部和下部，哪个部分的白色区域比例更大。每项任务开始前，一名受试者被随机挑出，并获得比另一名受试者明显更多的报酬。如果受试者并不知道他们各自获得报酬的情况，他们之间的协作就颇为融洽。可当他们知道了各自的报酬是多少时，报酬更高的那名受试者就会对其搭档的意见表现出更强烈的抵触态度。即使是报酬上的随机差别，也使人们做出以报酬推断技能的反向推理，并因此形成影响力上的不平等。这是个人及办公室动力学中不能忽视的部分。

但是问题的另一面，倒是离勒纳最初的动机更近一些。勒纳与同事提出的问题是，人们是否倾向于认为，那些不成功或正在承受痛苦的人，都是活该如此。研究将若干组女大学生集合在接待室中。几分钟后，其中一人被挑中并离开房间。我们称这名离开的学生为受害者，她实际上并非受试者，而是卧底的工作人员。然后剩下的受试者将对受害者进行观察。受害者将被要求完成一项学习任务，而每次她回答错误时，就会遭到一次电击。实验者调了一下据称可以控制电击强度的旋钮，然后打开电视监视器。受试者就这样看着受害者走进隔壁的房间，被缚上了一个「电击装置」，并开始学习一对儿对儿毫无意义的音节。

在学习期间，受害者由于回答错误而遭到几次看来颇为痛苦的电击，哀呼连连。实际上受害者不过是在演戏，而监视器播放的，只是一盘预先录制好的录像带。不出所料，大多数受试者在开始时都表示，同伴所遭受的不公正的磨难让她们感到不快。但随着实验继续进行，她们对受害者的同情慢慢减少。最终，这些无力提供帮助的受试者开始将不公平的批评加诸受害者。受害者遭受的痛苦越大，受试者对她的观感越差。正如勒纳预计的，受试者需要根据因果关系理解所面对的局面。为了确保不是别的什么因素造成了这个实验结果，实验者又在其他若干组受试者身上重复了该实验。但这一次他们还告诉受试者，受害者所吃的苦头将得到补偿。换句话说，除了让受试者相信受害者得到了「公平」对待这一点外，实验的其余部分与之前的完全相同。这一次，观察者没有形成恶评受害者的倾向。从这个实验来看，我们对那些来自社会底层的人持有的偏见，似乎很不幸地是一种下意识的行为。

我们没有看到随机性在生活中的影响，是因为在评价这个世界时，我们倾向于看到自己希望看到的东西。我们实际上是通过成功的程度来定义才能的高低的，然后再通过才能与成功之间的相关性进一步强化这种因果关系。尽管一个非常成功的人与一个不那么成功的人相比，他们的能力有时基本没什么差别，但我们看待他们的方式通常大不相同，原因就在于此。在《蓝色月光侦探社》播出之前，如果年轻的酒吧招待威利斯跟你说他希望成为电影明星，你肯定不会想：噢！有机会与这样一位魅力超凡的未来名流单独聊聊天，我可真是撞了大运了！相反，你更可能产生如下的想法：嗯，好吧，现在苦艾酒别喝过头就好。但节目大获成功的那一天，突然每个人都把威利斯视为明星，认为他是一个具有某种特殊能力，能抓住观众的心与想象力的家伙。

在几年前由心理学家罗森汉恩进行的一项大胆的实验中，预期的力量更是以戏剧性的方式被展示出来。实验中的 8 名「伪装病人」被分别派往多家医院。他们在医院接诊处抱怨听到了奇怪的声音。这些伪装病人的职业五花八门：三名自称是心理学家，一名是精神病学家，一名儿科医生，一个学生，一名画家，还有一位家庭主妇。除了声称的症状以及虚假的名字和职业，他们都如实描述了各自的日常生活。有些受试者后来表示，他们非常信任心理健康体系是以一种钟表般精准的方式运作的，因此他们一度担心医院会立刻发现他们的头脑显然是清醒而正常的，那就很令人难堪了。但他们完全多虑了。除了一名受试者，其余所有人都被允许进行精神分裂症的进一步诊断。而这名例外，也不过是要去看看他是不是得了躁狂抑郁症。

在医生接诊之后，受试者不再虚拟任何不正常的症状，并表示那些怪声都消失了。根据罗森汉恩预先所给的指示，他们接下来就等着医院的工作人员来发现，他们其实并没有发疯。但没有人注意到这一点。相反，医院工作人员透过预设的精神病的眼镜，来解释这些伪装病人的行为。当看到某位病人写日记时，他的护理记录被加上了一条「病人忙于书写」，并将书写视为精神疾病的一个标志。而当另一名病人因遭到服务人员的虐待而发怒时，这个行为同样被认为是其疾病的一部分。甚至连在自助餐厅开放之前就到那里等着吃午饭这样的行为，也被看成精神病的症状。倒是那些对伪装病人一无所知的其他病人，会常常用「你没有发疯，你是个记者…… 你在对这家医院进行暗访」这样的话来试探他们。但接诊伪装病人的医生们所做的记录类似于「该名 39 岁白人男性…… 长期以来在亲密关系中明显表现出正反情绪并存的情况，这种情况自幼年时就已经开始。与母亲的亲密关系在青春期时逐渐冷淡。与父亲的疏远关系则被描述为关系非常紧张」。

我们至少还是有个好消息的。尽管有着诸如喜欢写写画画和提前吃午饭等可疑行为，医生们总算还是认为这些伪装病人对自己和他人并不构成威胁，因此在医院平均待了 19 天后，他们都被放了出来。医院完全没有察觉到诡计的进行，而且当事后被告知真相时，医院否认了这种事情发生的可能性。

我们很容易沦为期望的受害者，却同样容易去利用这一点。在好莱坞全力拼搏的人们，却想方设法让自己看起来并没有怎么努力；医生们都穿着白大褂并在墙上挂满各种各样的执照和学位证书；二手车经销商宁可清理车辆表面的污迹，也不愿把钱花在引擎上；老师批改作业时，对完全相同的作业，给「优秀」学生的分数通常要比「差」学生的分数更高一些 ：之所以会出现这些情况，原因就是我们的期望被人利用了。搞市场推销的人同样知道这一点，所以他们会设计广告宣传诱惑并进而利用我们的期望。这种做法在伏特加市场相当行之有效。伏特加是一种中性烈酒，根据美国政府的规定蒸馏而成，其「没有可区分的性质、气味、味道或颜色」。因此，多数美国伏特加并不是由那些充满激情、身穿法兰绒衬衫、制造各种葡萄酒的人发明的，它们的发明者大多是农业化学品供应商阿彻丹尼尔斯米德兰这样的业界巨头。而伏特加酿酒师的工作，也不是通过管理酿造过程往酒中加入微妙的气味，而是往上述大公司提供的 190 份标准工业酒精样品中兑水，并尽可能去除其他味道。但是，通过大规模的幻觉制造，伏特加生产商成功地造成了人们对不同伏特加酒的差异的强烈期望。这种做法带来的结果，就是人们相信不同品牌但按定义而言应该是无法相互区分的伏特加酒，确实存在巨大的差异，而且他们还愿意为这些差异付出大把的钞票。为了不让自己被当作一个没有品位的乡巴佬踢出去，我很乐意指出，我的这些胡言乱语，其实是有办法检验的。我们可以排出一系列不同牌子的伏特加，再请一帮伏特加品酒师进行一次盲试。《纽约时报》就是这么做的。去掉标签之后，如灰雁伏特加和坎特一号伏特加这样高品位的伏特加，其表现就不怎么好了。事实上，相较于普遍的看法，检验结果看来是随机的。而且，在测试的 21 种伏特加中，价格最便宜的斯米诺伏特加得分最高。如果判断能与期待相隔离，并完全用数据来说话，那么我们对世界的评价将大为不同。

几年前，伦敦的《星期日泰晤士报》进行了一项实验。编辑们把获得了当代小说领域最有声望与影响力的世界性奖项之一的布克奖的两部小说，挑出各自的开头几章，用打字机打出来，并投稿到 20 个主要出版商和出版经纪人那里。两部小说一个是诺贝尔文学奖获得者奈保尔的《自由国度》，另一个则是斯坦利·米德尔顿的《假日》。我们完全有把握认为，收稿人要是知道稿件来历的话，他们一定会不吝溢美之词地夸奖这两部广受赞誉的小说。但《星期日泰晤士报》的编辑故意把这些投稿的小说片段，搞得好像是哪个还在努力奋斗等待出名的作家的作品一般，让出版商和出版经纪人无法看出稿件的真实来源。这两部非常成功的小说的命运如何呢？所有的答复都是退稿，只有一名伦敦的文学出版经纪人例外，他对米德尔顿的小说表示出一定的兴趣。不过即使是这样，他对奈保尔小说的评价也是：「我们…… 认为作品很具原创性，但恐怕它并不足以激发我们更多的兴趣。」

作家斯蒂芬·金无意中也进行过一次类似的实验。由于担心公众接受他的作品的速度没有他写书的速度快，他以理查德·巴赫曼的笔名写了一个小说系列。根据销量来看，即使是斯蒂芬·金，当他没有了这个名字之后，他也不再是斯蒂芬·金了（当作者的真实姓名终于曝光之后，该书的销量明显上升）。可悲的是，金却没有进行相反的实验：如果他把那些还未出名的作家所写的高质量但未出版的小说，用自己的名字包装之后，销量会怎样？但既然连斯蒂芬·金在没有这个名字时都不再是斯蒂芬·金，那么当我们这些「其他人」的作品得到的待遇不是那么「斯蒂芬·金」的时候，我们也许可以安慰一下自己，作品质量上的差别大概并不像某些人希望我们相信的那样悬殊。

我几年前在加州理工学院有一间办公室，就在一位名叫约翰·施瓦茨的物理学家的办公室过来拐角的地方。他几乎不为人所知，而且差不多是单枪匹马地坚持着一个名为「弦理论」的没人信的理论，该理论预言空间具有比我们观察到的三维还要多得多的维度。他忍受了整整 10 年的奚落。然后某一天，他与一名同事取得了技术上的突破，并由于一些跟本书关系不大的原因，那些多余的维度数突然间变得可接受了。之后，弦理论成为物理学最大的热点。如今，约翰被视为物理学界杰出的元老之一。但如果他在那些灰暗的年头中屈服了，他就会成为托马斯·爱迪生所说的「生活中的许多失败，乃是由于很多人没有认识到，在他们放弃的时候，他们是多么接近成功」这句话的活证据。

我所认识的另一名物理学家的经历与约翰惊人地相似。他碰巧就是约翰在加州大学伯克利分校的博士生导师。这位物理学家被认为是他那个时代最杰出的科学家之一，并且是一个被称为 S 矩阵理论的研究领域的带头人。与约翰一样，他十分固执，并在其他人都放弃的情况下，在这个理论上坚持研究了多年。但与约翰不同，他最终未能成功。正是由于没有成功，他成了许多人眼中的怪人，并以此身份结束了职业生涯。但我的意见是，他与约翰都是非常聪明的物理学家，也都有勇气在出现重大突破的前景还不明朗时，继续对这样一个理论进行研究。正如我们应该以作品的内容而非销量来评判作家一样，我们更应该根据能力评价物理学家及所有努力奋斗的人，而不是像在更多情况下那样只看他们有没有获得成功。

将能力与成功绑在一起的绳子，不仅很松，而且弹性十足。我们可以很容易在成功的书中发现其优点，也可以在未能出版的手稿、廉价的伏特加或仍然在某领域中艰苦奋斗的人的身上发现其缺点。我们轻易地相信奏效的点子都是好点子，成功的计划都设计良好，而没有奏效的点子与计划，根本就是在构思上有毛病。我们也很容易将那些最为成功的人塑造成英雄，而对那些最不成功的人报以轻蔑的一瞥。但能力并不保证一定能获得成就，而成就也并非与能力完全匹配。因此重要的一点是，我们不要忘记成功方程式中偶然性的那一项所扮演的角色。

将某领域最为成功的人视作超级英雄，这并不是悲剧。但如果我们的放弃是因为信任专家评判或市场业绩，而不是出于对自己的了解，就是一个悲剧了，正如图尔在他后来成为畅销书的《笨蛋联盟》的手稿被一次次退稿后自杀那样。因此，在试图根据某人的成功程度评价他 / 她时，我会提醒自己，如果他们有机会从头再来，斯蒂芬·金也许不过是另一个理查德·巴赫曼，奈保尔也不过是另一个还在努力拼搏的作家。而在那默默无闻的人群中，还游荡着许许多多与比尔·盖茨、布鲁斯·威利斯和罗杰·马里斯同样了不起的人，只不过命运没有赐给他们那些刚好被人们需要的划时代的产品、电视节目，或体育赛季。我从这些例子中学到的，就是我们首先需要一往无前，因为对我们来说最大的好消息就是，既然偶然性确实在我们的成功中扮演了某个角色，那么通往成功的要素之一已经掌握在我们手中，那就是我们上垒击球的次数，我们获得机会的次数，我们把握机会的次数。因为即使是一枚更容易扔出失败结果的硬币，有时也会获得成功。或者如 IBM 老总裁托马斯·华生说的那样：「要成功，就把你的失败次数加倍。」

我一直在本书中试着向读者展示随机性的基本概念，说明它们在各种问题中的应用方式，并表明我的如下观点：在解释事件时，以及在进行预期和决策时，随机性的作用很大程度上被忽视了。哪怕只是认识到随机过程在生活中所扮演的无处不在的角色，都足以让我们豁然醒悟。但随机过程理论的真正力量，在于一旦理解了随机过程的本性，我们就会改变看待周围事物的方式。

心理学家罗森汉恩写道：「一个人一旦不正常，他所有的举止和特征就会被挂上‘不正常’的标签。」对演员以及其他许多成功或失败的标签来说，这句话同样适用。我们通过结果评判他人和他们的动机。我们希望事情之所以发生，是因为有一个好的且我们能够理解的原因。但我们所看到的清晰的必然性，通常不过是错觉而已。我相信，在面对不确定性时，我们能够调整我们的思维方式。正是出于这种信念，我写下了这本书。我们可以提高决策技巧，并克服某些能带来不当判断与选择的偏见。我们不应该通过以成败论英雄的方式，了解他人的能力与其他各种状况。而且我们应该学会根据所有可能结果的分布而非实际所得的具体结果，判断决策的优劣。

母亲总是告诫我，不要以为自己可以预测或控制未来。她跟我说起让她产生这种信念的事件。事情与她姐姐萨比娜有关。尽管母亲上次见到她已经是 65 年前的事儿了，但母亲仍然常常提到她。母亲当时 15 岁，她很崇拜姐姐，正如弟弟妹妹们对哥哥姐姐有时怀有的崇敬那样。当时纳粹已经侵入波兰，我那出身贫民区的父亲加入了地下抵抗组织，后来被关进了布痕瓦尔德集中营。当时还不认识父亲的母亲则出生于富人区，她被关到一个劳改营里。在那里，她被指派为护士的助手照料斑疹伤寒患者。当时食物十分稀缺，不可预料的死亡却总在近旁。为了在那危险无时不在的环境中保护我的母亲，萨比娜采取了行动。她的一名朋友是犹太警察成员，这些警察按照德国人的命令维持集中营的秩序，并通常遭到集中营内其他人的蔑视。萨比娜的朋友向她求婚，虽然只是名义上的婚姻，因为这样一来，萨比娜就能得到他的职位所能提供的保护。考虑到我的母亲也可以沾光，萨比娜接受了求婚。然后不好的事情发生了。德国人开始讨厌这些犹太警察，并把若干犹太警察连同他们的配偶一起送进了毒气室，其中就包括萨比娜和她的丈夫。相较于与萨比娜相处的日子，我母亲现在已经活过了更长的岁月，但萨比娜的死仍然纠缠着她。母亲担心一旦自己过世，萨比娜留下的痕迹就不复存在了。对她而言，这个故事说明做计划根本是毫无意义的事情。我并不赞同这一点，我相信计划十分重要，如果我们是睁开双眼去做计划的话。但更重要的是，母亲的经历告诉我，我们应当看到我们获得的好运，并对此心怀感恩，进而认识到随机事件在成功中所占的分量。这件事还教会我要接受那些令人悲痛的偶然事件。最重要的是，它教会了我感恩，我庆幸自己没有碰到坏运气，没有碰到那些可能彻底击垮我的事，没有经历疾病、战争、饥荒，以及那些没有 —— 或者还没有 —— 降临到我身上的意外。