Part III Epilogue

# 0301. The Future of the Theory

The present volume does not allow full treatment of all aspects of a social capital theory. The immediate future of such a theory depends on continuing refinement of both the theory itself and measurements of the concepts involved. As mentioned in the Preface, I chose to focus on the instrumental aspect of social capital and thus shortchanged its expressive aspect, not that my own research efforts have ignored the latter (Lin, Simeone, Ensel, and Kuo 1979; Lin, Dean, and Ensel 1986; Lin and Ensel 1989; Lin and Lai 1995; Lin and Peek 1999). There is a substantial and thriving literature on the effects on mental health and the well-being of social support, social networks, and social resources. To do justice to the expressive aspect of social capital would require perhaps another monograph of comparable size. I also abbreviated the coverage of social capital as a collective asset, because my evaluation convinced me that its theoretical and research viability can be extrapolated from the formulations as outlined in this monograph rather than being treated as a separate and independent entity (see Chapters 2, 8, and 12). However, it is appropriate to use this last chapter to present, no matter how briefly, some thoughts on issues of theoretical integrations incorporating these aspects as well.

Modeling Social Capital

A comprehensive social capital model needs to investigate (1) investment in social capital, (2) access to and mobilization of social capital, and (3) returns on social capital. While the discussions throughout this monograph have clarified social capital’s definition, elements, and measurements, it is necessary to discuss briefly the types of outcomes that can be considered expected returns. I propose two major types of outcomes: (1) returns on instrumental action and (2) returns on expressive action (Lin 243

1986, 1990, 1992a). Instrumental action is taken to obtain resources not possessed by the actor, whereas expressive action is taken to maintain resources already possessed by the actor.

For instrumental action, we may identify three possible returns: economic, political, and social. Each return can be seen as added capital.

Economic return is straightforward and is in terms of wealth, including earnings, assets, and so on. Political return is similarly straightforward, as it is represented by hierarchical positions in a collective. Social gain needs some clarification. It has been argued that reputation is an indication of social gain (Chapter 9). Reputation can be defined as the extent of favorable/unfavorable opinions about an individual in a collective. As delineated in Chapter 9, a critical issue in social exchange where social capital is transacted is that the transaction may be asymmetric: a favor is given by alter to ego. Ego’s action is facilitated, but what is the gain for alter, the giver of the favor? Unlike economic exchange, where reciprocal and symmetric transactions are expected in the short or long term, social exchange may not entail such an expectation. What is expected is that ego and alter both acknowledge the asymmetric transactions that create the former’s social debt to the latter, who accrues social credit. Social debt must be publicly acknowledged for ego to maintain his or her relationship with alter. Public recognition in the network spreads the reputation of alter. The greater the debt, the larger the network, and the stronger the need for ego and alter to maintain the relationship; the greater the propensity to spread the word in the network, the greater the reputation gained by alter. In this process, alter is gratified by the reputation, which, along with material resources (such as wealth) and hierarchical positions (such as power), constitutes one of the three returns fundamental in instrumental actions.

For expressive action, social capital is a means to consolidate resources and defend against possible resource losses (Lin 1986, 1990). The principle is to access and mobilize others who share interests and control of similar resources so that embedded resources can be pooled and shared in order to preserve and protect existing resources. In this process, alters are willing to share their resources with ego because the preservation of ego and its resources enhances and reinforce the legitimacy of alters’ claim to like resources. Three types of return may be specified: physical health, mental health, and life satisfaction. Physical health involves maintenance of physical functional competence and freedom from diseases and injuries. Mental health reflects the ability to with-stand stresses and to maintain cognitive and emotional balance. The homophily principle informs us that persons with similar characteristics, attitudes, and lifestyles tend to congregate in similar residential, social, and work environments that promote interactions and associations. Sim-

The Future of the Theory 245

ilarly, the frequency and intensity of interactions increase similar attitudes and lifestyles.

Thus formulated, the theory permits certain predictions regarding the process of maintaining mental health; namely, that access and use of strong and homophilous ties promote mental health. Maintenance of a health status, regardless of its definition and origin (which can be either instrumental, i.e., losing a job or expressive, i.e., having arguments with a spouse), requires sharing and confiding among intimates who can understand and appreciate the problems involved. Likewise, it is expected that strong and homophilous ties promote sharing of resources, which in turn enhances life satisfaction, as indicated by optimism and satisfaction with various life domains such as family, marriage, work, and community and neighborhood environments.

Returns to instrumental actions and expressive actions often reinforce each other. Physical health offers the capacity to endure a heavy work load and responsibility to attain economic, political, and social statuses.

Likewise, economic, political, or social statuses often offer resources to maintain physical health (exercises, diet, and health maintenance).

Mental health and life satisfaction are likewise expected to have reciprocal effects with economic, political, and social gains. However, factors leading to instrumental and expressive returns are expected to show differential patterns. As mentioned earlier, it may well be that open networks and relations are more likely to enable access to and use of bridges to reach resources lacking in one’s social circle and to enhance one’s chances of gaining resources/instrumental returns. On the other hand, a denser network with more intimate and reciprocal relations among members may increase the likelihood of mobilizing others with shared interests and resources to defend and protect existing resources/

expressive returns. Further, exogenous factors, such as community and institutional arrangements and prescriptive versus competitive incentives, may contribute differentially to the density and openness of networks and relations and to the success of instrumental or expressive actions.

With the core elements of social capital, types of returns, and differential patterns of causal effects identified, it is possible to conceive an analytic model (Lin 1999a). As can be seen in Figure 13.1, the model contains three blocks of variables in causal sequences. One block represents preconditions and precursors of social capital: the factors in the social structure and each individual’s position in the social structure, both of which facilitate or constrain the investment of social capital.

Another block represents social capital elements, and a third block represents possible returns for social capital.

The process leading from the first block to the second block describes the formation of inequality of social capital: structural elements and

Figure 13.1 Modeling a theory of social capital.

positional elements in the structure affect opportunities to construct and maintain social capital. This delineates patterns of differential distributions for social resources that are embedded, accessed, or mobilized (capital deficit [Chapter 7]). It should further demonstrate that there are social forces that determine such differential distributions. Thus, it is incumbent on a theory of social capital to delineate the patterns and determinants of the three ingredients of social capital or the inequality of social capital as collective assets, accessible social resources, and mobilized social resources. Two types of causation forces are of special interest to scholars in this analysis: structural and positional variations. A structure may be characterized by many variations, such as diversity in culture and ideology, level of industrialization and technology, level of education, extent of physical and natural resources, economic productivity, and so on. Within a structure, individuals may be described as occupying different positions in social, cultural, political, and economic strata. These variations may be hypothesized to affect differential investment (i.e., the norm differentially encourages or discourages certain members from investing in social capital) and opportunities (i.e., certain positions offer better or worse chances of acquiring social capital).

Within the second block, there is a process linking two elements of social capital: access to social capital and use of social capital. The process linking the two elements is the process of social capital mobilization. That is, given the unequal distributions of social capital, how would an individual be enabled or disabled to mobilize such capital for

The Future of the Theory 247

specific actions? This is where the model, while recognizing structural contributions to social capital as captured in the inequality process, also emphasizes possible choice action in mobilization.

Third, the theory needs to demonstrate that the three ingredients are connected. Thus, it needs to propose a causal sequence in which embedded resources constrain and enable individual choices and actions. The general expectation is that the better the accessible embedded resources, the more likely they can and will be mobilized in purposive actions by an individual.

Finally, the process linking the second block (social capital) and the third block (outcomes) represents the process whereby social capital produces returns or yields. Here the theory should demonstrate how social capital is capital or how it generates return or gain. That is, it should propose how one or more of the elements of social capital directly or indirectly impact an individual’s economic, political, and social capital (resources) or her or his physical, mental, and life well-being. The more intriguing questions are (1) why certain individuals have better or worse cognitive maps to the locations of better embedded resources; (2) why, given adequate perceptions, some actors are more or less willing to mobilize optimal ties and resources; (3) why certain intermediary agents are more or less willing to make appropriate efforts on their behalf; and (4) why certain organizations are more or less receptive to being influenced by social capital.

Macro- and Microimplications

These conceptualizations – as individual components and processes discussed in this monograph – are not new; they merely synthesize accumulated knowledge and findings. Research (as reviewed in Lin 1999b) has verified the proposition that social capital enhances an individual’s attained statuses, such as occupational status, authority, and placement in certain industries. Through these attained positions, social capital enhances economic earnings as well. These relationships hold up after family background and education are taken into account. Burt (1997, 1998) and others (Podolny and Baron 1997) have shown that advances and economic rewards are also enhanced in organizations for individuals at strategic locations in informal networks. Those closer to structural holes or bridges (and thus less structurally constrained) seem to gain better returns, presumably because such locations give these individuals better opportunities to access certain capital in the organization.

Research is progressing on how organizations use social capital in recruiting and retaining individuals. Fernandez and associates

(Fernandez and Weinberg 1997) have shown that referrals increase applications, lead to better-qualified candidate recruitment, and reduce costs in the screening process. Putnam’s studies (1993, 1995a, 1995b) indicate the same in terms of participation in civic associations (e.g., churches, PTAs, the Red Cross) and social groups (bowling leagues). Coleman (1990) provides examples of diffusion of information and mobilization through social circles among radical Korean students (i.e., a network as capital), a mother moving from Detroit to Jerusalem in order to have her child walk to a playground or school safely (a norm as capital), and diamond traders in New York utilizing informal ties and informal agreements (network and trust as capital). Portes (1998) also specifies「consummatory」and instrumental consequences of social capital (see Portes and Sensenbrenner 1993 for the consummatory consequences – solidarity and reciprocal support – of social capital for immigrant groups). The primary focus here is on the development, maintenance, or decline of collective assets.

At the mesonetwork level, the focus shifts to how individuals have differential access to resources embedded in the collective. The question posed is why certain individuals in a given collective have better access to embedded resources than others. The nature of social networks and social ties becomes the focus of analysis. Granovetter (1973, 1974, 1982, 1985, 1995) proposes that bridges, as usually reflected in weaker ties, provide better access to information. Burt (1992, 1997, 1998) sees that strategic locations in the networks (structural holes or constraints) imply better or worse access to information, influence, or control. Lin (1982, 1990, 1994a, 1995a, 1999a) has suggested that hierarchical positions as well as network locations facilitate or hinder access to embedded resources. Embedded resources are indicated by the wealth, status, and power of social ties.

At the microaction level, social capital is reflected in the actual linkage between the use of embedded resources in instrumental actions. For example, there is substantial literature on how informal sources and their resources (contact resources) are mobilized in job searches and their effects on attained socioeconomic statuses (Lin, Ensel, and Vaughn 1981; De Graaf and Flap 1988; Marsden and Hurlbert 1988).

Research in the area of returns on expressive actions has also been extensive. Much is known about the indirect effects of networks on mental health and life satisfaction (Berkman and Syme 1979; Wellman 1981; Kadushin 1983; Berkman 1984; Hall and Wellman 1985; Lin 1986; House, Umberson, and Landis 1988; Lin, Ye, and Ensel 1999).

That is, network locations enhance the likelihood of accessing social support, which in turn improves one’s physical or mental well-being.

Another arena for potential theoretical and research work concerns the

The Future of the Theory 249

synergy and tension between instrumental and expressive actions for the well-being of individuals as well as society. The fact that success in society, either for expressive or instrumental purposes, relies significantly on who you know and who you「use」modifies both the functional explanation of social mobility and the structural determinism of individual behavior. While structural characteristics impose a range of possible behaviors, including communication access, individuals have certain degrees of freedom in the manipulation of the social structure for their own benefits. The degree of such freedom is determined both by the individual’s position in the structure and by his or her own strategic choices.

On a still broader level, this theory reminds us that both instrumental and expressive behaviors have structural significance. Expressive behaviors, which have received much research attention in the past, point to the types of social interactions that promote horizontal linkages among individuals with similar characteristics and lifestyles. Such behaviors reinforce the solidarity and stability of social groups. However, instrumental behaviors dictate equally significant social interactions providing vertical linkages. Such behaviors allow greater social mobility and greater sharing of resources in society.

There is intrinsic complementarity as well as tension between the two types of behavior. Excessive instrumental actions risk the loss of group identity and solidarity as one attempts to move from one position to another. On the other hand, excessive expressive behaviors promote the stagnation of social segmentation and nurture the development of class consciousness and class conflict. The relative frequency and intensity of instrumental and expressive interactions in a society, I believe, holds the key in determining the dynamics of stability and change. I postulate that the persistence of a given social structure depends on the relative amounts of expressive and instrumental interaction actually taking place among its members. The optimal points of such interactions for both persistence and change should be the focus of future theoretical and empirical explorations.