## 记忆时间

## 目录

20210423Two-Must-Know-OOP-Concepts-in-Python.md

20210515Java-Convert-Object-to-Map-Example.md

20210515Curry-and-Function-Composition.md

20210516Maps-in-Javascript.md

## 20210423Two-Must-Know-OOP-Concepts-in-Python.md

### Conclusion

Both inheritance and polymorphism are fundamental concepts of object oriented programming. These concepts help us to create code that can be extended and easily maintainable.

Inheritance is a great way to eliminate unnecessary repetitive code. A child class can inherit from the parent class partially or entirely. Python is quite flexible with regards to inheritance. We can add new attributes and methods as well as modify the existing ones.

Polymorphism contributes to Python's flexibility as well. An object with a particular type can be used as if it belonged to a different type. We have seen an example of it with the `give_raise` method.

### 00

[2 Must-Know OOP Concepts in Python | by Soner Yıldırım | Apr, 2021 | Towards Data Science](https://towardsdatascience.com/2-must-know-oop-concepts-in-python-48d643a7385)

Object oriented programming (OOP) paradigm is built around the idea of having objects that belong to a particular type. In a sense, the type is what explains us the object.

Everything in Python is an object and every object has a type. These types are declared and defined using classes. Thus, classes can be considered as the heart of OOP.

In order to develop robust and well-designed software products with Python, it is essential to obtain a comprehensive understanding of OOP. In this article, we will elaborate on two key concepts of OOP which are inheritance and polymorphism.
Both inheritance and polymorphism are key ingredients for designing robust, flexible, and easy-to-maintain software. These concepts are best explained via examples. Let's start with creating a simple class.

```py
class Employee():
   def __init__(self, emp_id, salary):
      self.emp_id = emp_id
      self.salary = salary
  def give_raise(self):
      self.salary = self.salary * 1.05
```

We have created a class called Employee. It has two data attributes which are employee id (`emp_id`) and salary. We have also defined a method called `give_raise`. It applies a 5-percent increase on the salary of an employee.

We can create an instance of the Employee class (i.e. an object with Employee type) and apply the `give_raise` method as follows:

```
emp1 = Employee(1001, 56000)
print(emp1.salary)
56000
emp1.give_raise()
print(emp1.salary)
58800.0
```

OOP allows us to create a class based on another class. For instance, we can create the Manager class based on the Employee class.

```py
class Manager(Employee):
   pass
```

In this scenario, Manager is said to be a child class of the Employee class. The child class copies the attributes (both data and procedural) from the parent class. This concept is called inheritance.

It is important to note that inheritance does not mean copying a class. We can partially inherit from a parent (or base class). Python also allows for adding new attributes as well as modifying the existing ones. Thus, inheritance comes with a great deal of flexibility.

We can now create a manager object just like we create an employee object.

```py
mgr1 = Manager(101, 75000)
print(mgr1.salary)
75000
```

A child class can have new attributes in addition to the ones inherited from the parent class. Furthermore, we have the option to modify or override the inherited attributes.

Let's update the `give_raise` method so that it applies a 10-percent increase for the managers.

```py
class Manager(Employee):
   def give_raise(self):
      self.salary = self.salary * 1.10
```

```
mgr1 = Manager(101, 75000)
print(mgr1.salary)
75000
mgr1.give_raise()
print(mgr1.salary)
82500
```

We will create another child class of the Employee class. The Director class inherits the attributes from the Employee class and modifies the `give_raise` method with a 20-percent increase.

```py
class Director(Employee):
   def give_raise(self):
     self.salary = self.salary * 1.20
```

We now have three different class and they all have a `give_raise` method. Although the name of the method is the same, it behaves differently for different type of objects. This is an example of polymorphism.

Polymorphism allows for leveraging the same interface for different underlying operations. Regarding our example of manager and director objects, we can use them as they were an instance of the employee class. Let's see polymorphism in action. We will define a function that applies raise to a list of employees.

```py
def bulk_raise(list_of_emps):
   for emp in list_of_emps:
      emp.give_raise()
```

The `bulk_raise` function takes a list of employees and apply the `give_raise` function to each object in the list. The next step is to create a list of employees of different types.

```
emp1 = Employee(101, 45000)
emp2 = Manager(103, 60000)
emp3 = Director(105, 70000)
list_of_emps = [emp1, emp2, emp3]
```

Our list contains one employee, one manager, and one director objects. We can now call the `bulk_raise` function.

```
bulk_raise(list_of_emps)
print(emp1.salary)
47250.0
print(emp2.salary)
66000.0
print(emp3.salary)
84000.0
```

Although each object in the list has a different type, we do not have to explicitly state it in our function. Python knows which `give_raise` method to apply. As we see in the examples, polymorphism is accomplished using inheritance. Subclasses (or child classes) make use of the methods from the parent class to establish polymorphism.

1-3『又想到那句金句：面向对象，从下往上看是继承，从上往下看是多态。（2021-04-23）』

## 20210515Java-Convert-Object-to-Map-Example.md

[Java — Convert Object to Map example | by Nayan Arora | Medium](https://medium.com/@aroranayan/java-convert-object-to-map-example-3244bf8b153e)

In Java, you can use the Jackson library to convert a Java object into a Map easily.

[FasterXML/jackson: Main Portal page for the Jackson project](https://github.com/FasterXML/jackson)

### 01. Get Jackson

pom.xml

```
<dependency>
	<groupId>com.fasterxml.jackson.core</groupId>
	<artifactId>jackson-databind</artifactId>
	<version>2.6.3</version>
</dependency>
```

### 02. Convert Object to Map

A Jackson 2 example to convert a Student object into a java.util.Map

Student.java

```java
package com.nayan.examples;
import java.util.List;

public class Student {
    private String name;
    private int age;
    private List<String> skills;
    // getters setters
}
```

ObjectToMapExample.java

```java
package com.nayan.examples;
import com.fasterxml.jackson.databind.ObjectMapper;
import java.util.Arrays;
import java.util.Map;

public class ObjectToMapExample {
    public static void main(String[] args) {
        ObjectMapper oMapper = new ObjectMapper();
        Student obj = new Student();
        obj.setName("nayan");
        obj.setAge(34);
        obj.setSkills(Arrays.asList("java","angular"));
        // object -> Map
        Map<String, Object> map = oMapper.convertValue(obj, Map.class);
        System.out.println(map);
    }
}
```

Output

```
{name=nayan, age=34, skills=[java, angular]}
```

1-2『

[Jackson Tutorial | Baeldung](https://www.baeldung.com/jackson)

并且还下载本书籍「2021084Do-JSON-with-Jackson」。

经测试可行（2021-05-15）。

1、引入包依赖。在项目的 pom.xml 里增加依赖语句：

```java
        <dependency>
            <groupId>com.fasterxml.jackson.core</groupId>
            <artifactId>jackson-databind</artifactId>
        </dependency>
```

不用写版本号，它会自己找最新的版本。开始的时候写了一个版本号，跑的时候 idea 又生成了下面没有版本号的依赖，索性就把上面有版本号的依赖删掉了。

2、实现把洁净空调全局性的数据对象转为 map 对象。

```java
    /**
     * 获取房间洁净等级代号 map 集合
     *
     * @param nsCleanAirGlobalParam
     * @return unit test completed
     */
    @Override
    public Map<String, Object> getCleanGradeCodeMap(NsCleanAirGlobalParam nsCleanAirGlobalParam) {
        ObjectMapper oMapper = new ObjectMapper();
        Map<String, Object> cleanGradeCodeMap = oMapper.convertValue(nsCleanAirGlobalParam, Map.class);

        return cleanGradeCodeMap;
    }
```

返回的 map 对象，键名是字符串（原来对象里的对象名），键值是个对象（原来对象里的对象值），这个键值对象可以通过调方法 `get("key")` 来获取。

3、写单元测试。

```java
    @Test
    void getCleanGradeCodeMap() {
        Map<String, Object> res = nsCleanAirService.getCleanGradeCodeMap(nsCleanAirGlobalParam);
        Assertions.assertEquals(12, res.get("cncMinAirChangeRate"));
    }
```

』

## 20210515Curry-and-Function-Composition.md

[Curry and Function Composition. Note: This is part of the "Composing… | by Eric Elliott | JavaScript Scene | Medium](https://medium.com/javascript-scene/curry-and-function-composition-2c208d774983)

Nov 13, 2018

### Conclusion

A curried function is a function which takes multiple parameters one at a time, by taking the first argument, and returning a series of functions which each take the next argument until all the parameters have been fixed, and the function application can complete, at which point, the resulting value is returned.

A partial application is a function which has already been applied to some — but not yet all — of its arguments. The arguments which the function has already been applied to are called fixed parameters.

Point-free style is a way of defining a function without reference to its arguments. Generally, a point-free function is created by calling a function which returns a function, such as a curried function.

Curried functions are great for function composition, because they allow you to easily convert an n-ary function into the unary function form needed for function composition pipelines: Functions in a pipeline must expect exactly one argument.
Data last functions are convenient for function composition, because they can be easily used in point-free style.

### 00

Note: This is part of the "Composing Software" series (now a book!) on learning functional programming and compositional software techniques in JavaScriptES6+ from the ground up. Stay tuned. There's a lot more of this to come!

2『已下载书籍「2021085Composing-Software」，感觉这本书不错的，也就 200 多页，一定要研读掉。（2021-05-16）』

With the dramatic rise of functional programming in mainstream JavaScript, curried functions have become common in many applications. It's important to understand what they are, how they work, and how to put them to good use.

### 01. What is a curried function?

A curried function is a function that takes multiple arguments one at a time. Given a function with 3 parameters, the curried version will take one argument and return a function that takes the next argument, which returns a function that takes the third argument. The last function returns the result of applying the function to all of its arguments.

1『 curried function 的定义做一张术语卡片。（2021-05-16）』—— 已完成

You can do the same thing with more or fewer parameters. For example, given two numbers, a and b in curried form, return the sum of a and b:

```js
// add = a => b => Number
const add = a => b => a + b;
```

To use it, we must apply both functions, using the function application syntax. In JavaScript, the parentheses () after the function reference triggers function invocation. When a function returns another function, the returned function can be immediately invoked by adding an extra set of parentheses:

```js
const result = add(2)(3); // => 5
```

First, the function takes a, and then returns a new function, which then takes b returns the sum of a and b. Each argument is taken one at a time. If the function had more parameters, it could simply continue to return new functions until all of the arguments are supplied and the application can be completed.

The add function takes one argument, and then returns a partial application of itself with a fixed in the closure scope. A closure is a function bundled with its lexical scope. Closures are created at runtime during function creation. Fixed means that the variables are assigned values in the closure's bundled scope.

The parentheses in the example above represent function invocations: add is invoked with 2, which returns a partially applied function with a fixed to 2. Instead of assigning the return value to a variable or otherwise using it, we immediately invoke the returned function by passing 3 to it in parentheses, which completes the application and returns 5.

### 02. What is a partial application?

A partial application is a function which has been applied to some, but not yet all of its arguments. In other words, it's a function which has some arguments fixed inside its closure scope. A function with some of its parameters fixed is said to be partially applied.

### 03. What's the Difference?

Partial applications can take as many or as few arguments a time as desired. Curried functions on the other hand always return a unary function: a function which takes one argument. All curried functions return partial applications, but not all partial applications are the result of curried functions.

The unary requirement for curried functions is an important feature.

### 04. What is point-free style?

Point-free style is a style of programming where function definitions do not make reference to the function's arguments. Let's look at function definitions in JavaScript:

```js
function foo (/* parameters are declared here*/) {
  // ...
}

const foo = (/* parameters are declared here */) => // ...

const foo = function (/* parameters are declared here */) {
  // ...
}
```

How can you define functions in JavaScript without referencing the required parameters? Well, we can't use the functionkeyword, and we can't use an arrow function (=>) because those require any formal parameters to be declared (which would reference its arguments). So what we'll need to do instead is call a function that returns a function.

Create a function that increments whatever number you pass to it by one using point-free style. Remember, we already have a function called add that takes a number and returns a partially applied function with its first parameter fixed to whatever you pass in. We can use that to create a new function called inc():

```js
// inc = n => Number
// Adds 1 to any number.
const inc = add(1);
inc(3); // => 4
```

This gets interesting as a mechanism for generalization and specialization. The returned function is just a specialized version of the more general add() function. We can use add() to create as many specialized versions as we want:

```js
const inc10 = add(10);
const inc20 = add(20);
inc10(3); // => 13
inc20(3); // => 23
```

And of course, these all have their own closure scopes (closures are created at function creation time — when add() is invoked), so the original inc() keeps working:

```js
inc(3) // 4
```

When we create inc() with the function call add(1), the a parameter inside add() gets fixed to 1 inside the returned function that gets assigned to inc. Then when we call inc(3), the b parameter inside add() is replaced with the argument value, 3, and the application completes, returning the sum of 1 and 3.

All curried functions are a form of higher-order function which allows you to create specialized versions of the original function for the specific use case at hand.

### 05. Why do we curry?

Curried functions are particularly useful in the context of function composition.

In algebra, given two functions, g and f:

```js
g: a -> b
f: b -> c
```

You can compose those functions together to create a new function, h from a directly to c:

```js
// Algebra definition, borrowing the `.` composition operator
// from Haskell
h: a -> c
h = f . g = f(g(x))
In JavaScript:
const g = n => n + 1;
const f = n => n * 2;
const h = x => f(g(x));
h(20); //=> 42
The algebra definition:
f . g = f(g(x))
```

Can be translated into JavaScript:

```js
const compose = (f, g) => x => f(g(x));
```

But that would only be able to compose two functions at a time. In algebra, it's possible to write:

```js
f . g . h
```

We can write a function to compose as many functions as you like. In other words, compose() creates a pipeline of functions with the output of one function connected to the input of the next. Here's the way I usually write it:

```js
const compose = (...fns) => x => fns.reduceRight((y, f) => f(y), x);
```

This version takes any number of functions and returns a function which takes the initial value, and then uses reduceRight() to iterate right-to-left over each function, f, in fns, and apply it in turn to the accumulated value, y. What we're accumulating with the accumulator, y in this function is the return value for the function returned by compose().

Now we can write our composition like this:

```js
const g = n => n + 1;
const f = n => n * 2;
// replace `x => f(g(x))` with `compose(f, g)`
const h = compose(f, g);
h(20); //=> 42
```

### 06. Trace

Function composition using point-free style creates very concise, readable code, but it can come at the cost of easy debugging. What if you want to inspect the values between functions? trace() is a handy utility that will allow you to do just that. It takes the form of a curried function:

```js
const trace = label => value => {
  console.log(`${ label }: ${ value }`);
  return value;
};
```

Now we can inspect the pipeline:

```js
const compose = (...fns) => x => fns.reduceRight((y, f) => f(y), x);
const trace = label => value => {
  console.log(`${ label }: ${ value }`);
  return value;
};
const g = n => n + 1;
const f = n => n * 2;
/*
Note: function application order is
bottom-to-top:
*/
const h = compose(
  trace('after f'),
  f,
  trace('after g'),
  g
);
h(20);
/*
after g: 21
after f: 42
*/
```

compose() is a great utility, but when we need to compose more than two functions, it's sometimes handy if we can read them in top-to-bottom order. We can do that by reversing the order the functions are called. There's another composition utility called pipe() that composes in reverse order:

```js
const pipe = (...fns) => x => fns.reduce((y, f) => f(y), x);
Now we can write the above code like this:
const pipe = (...fns) => x => fns.reduce((y, f) => f(y), x);
const trace = label => value => {
  console.log(`${ label }: ${ value }`);
  return value;
};
const g = n => n + 1;
const f = n => n * 2;
/*
Now the function application order
runs top-to-bottom:
*/
const h = pipe(
  g,
  trace('after g'),
  f,
  trace('after f'),
);
h(20);
/*
after g: 21
after f: 42
*/
```

Curry and Function Composition, Together

Even outside the context of function composition, currying is certainly a useful abstraction we can use to specialize functions. For example, a curried version of map() can be specialized to do many different things:

```js
const map = fn => mappable => mappable.map(fn);
const pipe = (...fns) => x => fns.reduce((y, f) => f(y), x);
const log = (...args) => console.log(...args);
const arr = [1, 2, 3, 4];
const isEven = n => n % 2 === 0;
const stripe = n => isEven(n) ? 'dark' : 'light';
const stripeAll = map(stripe);
const striped = stripeAll(arr); 
log(striped);
// => ["light", "dark", "light", "dark"]
const double = n => n * 2;
const doubleAll = map(double);
const doubled = doubleAll(arr);
log(doubled);
// => [2, 4, 6, 8]
```

But the real power of curried functions is that they simplify function composition. A function can take any number of inputs, but can only return a single output. In order for functions to be composable, the output type must align with the expected input type:

```js
f: a => b
g:      b => c
h: a    =>   c
```

If the g function above expected two parameters, the output from f wouldn't line up with the input for g:

```js
f: a => b
g:     (x, b) => c
h: a    =>   c
```

How do we get x into g in this scenario? Usually, the answer is to curry g.

Remember the definition of a curried function is a function which takes multiple parameters one at a time by taking the first argument and returning a series of functions which each take the next argument until all the parameters have been collected.

The key words in that definition are "one at a time". The reason that curried functions are so convenient for function composition is that they transform functions which expect multiple parameters into functions which can take a single argument, allowing them to fit in a function composition pipeline. Take the trace() function as an example, from earlier:

```js
const pipe = (...fns) => x => fns.reduce((y, f) => f(y), x);
const trace = label => value => {
  console.log(`${ label }: ${ value }`);
  return value;
};
const g = n => n + 1;
const f = n => n * 2;
const h = pipe(
  g,
  trace('after g'),
  f,
  trace('after f'),
);
h(20);
/*
after g: 21
after f: 42
*/
```

trace() defines two parameters, but takes them one at a time, allowing us to specialize the function inline. If trace() were not curried, we couldn't use it in this way. We'd have to write the pipeline like this:

```js
const pipe = (...fns) => x => fns.reduce((y, f) => f(y), x);
const trace = (label, value) => {
  console.log(`${ label }: ${ value }`);
  return value;
};
const g = n => n + 1;
const f = n => n * 2;
const h = pipe(
  g,
  // the trace() calls are no longer point-free,
  // introducing the intermediary variable, `x`.
  x => trace('after g', x),
  f,
  x => trace('after f', x),
);
h(20);
```

But simply currying a function is not enough. You also need to ensure that the function is expecting parameters in the correct order to specialize them. Look what happens if we curry trace() again, but flip the parameter order:

```js
const pipe = (...fns) => x => fns.reduce((y, f) => f(y), x);
const trace = value => label => {
  console.log(`${ label }: ${ value }`);
  return value;
};
const g = n => n + 1;
const f = n => n * 2;
const h = pipe(
  g,
  // the trace() calls can't be point-free,
  // because arguments are expected in the wrong order.
  x => trace(x)('after g'),
  f,
  x => trace(x)('after f'),
);
h(20);
```

If you're in a pinch, you can fix that problem with a function called flip(), which simply flips the order of two parameters:

```js
const flip = fn => a => b => fn(b)(a);
Now we can crate a flippedTrace() function:
const flippedTrace = flip(trace);
And use it like this:
const flip = fn => a => b => fn(b)(a);
const pipe = (...fns) => x => fns.reduce((y, f) => f(y), x);
const trace = value => label => {
  console.log(`${ label }: ${ value }`);
  return value;
};
const flippedTrace = flip(trace);
const g = n => n + 1;
const f = n => n * 2;
const h = pipe(
  g,
  flippedTrace('after g'),
  f,
  flippedTrace('after f'),
);
h(20);
```

But a better approach is to write the function correctly in the first place. The style is sometimes called "data last", which means that you should take the specializing parameters first, and take the data the function will act on last. That gives us the original form of the function:

```js
const trace = label => value => {
  console.log(`${ label }: ${ value }`);
  return value;
};
Each application of trace() to a label creates a specialized version of the trace function that is used in the pipeline, where the label is fixed inside the returned partial application of trace. So this:
const trace = label => value => {
  console.log(`${ label }: ${ value }`);
  return value;
};
const traceAfterG = trace('after g');
… is equivalent to this:
const traceAfterG = value => {
  const label = 'after g';
  console.log(`${ label }: ${ value }`);
  return value;
};
If we swapped trace('after g') for traceAfterG, it would mean the same thing:
const pipe = (...fns) => x => fns.reduce((y, f) => f(y), x);
const trace = label => value => {
  console.log(`${ label }: ${ value }`);
  return value;
};
// The curried version of trace()
// saves us from writing all this code...
const traceAfterG = value => {
  const label = 'after g';
  console.log(`${ label }: ${ value }`);
  return value;
};
const g = n => n + 1;
const f = n => n * 2;
const h = pipe(
  g,
  traceAfterG,
  f,
  trace('after f'),
);
h(20);
```

## 20210516Maps-in-Javascript.md

[Maps in Javascript. ES6 introduced new data structures to… | by Andrew Richards | The Startup | Medium](https://medium.com/swlh/maps-in-javascript-33508a5cb6e7)

Sep 3, 2020

ES6 introduced new data structures to take care of some problems that the language did not take care of.

Before it's introduction, people generally used Objects to do the work. However, Objects do not allow keys to be anything other than a string or integer. Keys in a Map, on the other hand, can be anything (object, array, string, or number). This allows for some interesting uses.

Features that objects do not have: 1) Can store Arrays and Objects as keys. 2) Easily iterable in order of entry.

### 01. How to Create a Map

```js
let m = new Map()
```

### 02. Built in Methods

```js
.set()
```

Use the set method to add entries to a Map.

```js
m.set('key', 'value')
m.set('hello', 'world)
```

```js
.get()
```

Use the get method to get the value of a Key, Value pair in a map

```js
m.get('hello')
// 'world'
```

```js
.has()
```

Use the has method to check if a key is in the Map. Returns a boolean.

```js
m.has('hi')
//false
m.has('hello')
//true
```

```js
.size()
```

Use the size method to check the size of a Map. Something that is not available with an object.

```js
m.size()
//2
```

```js
.delete()
```

Use the delete method to remove an entry from a Map.

```js
m.delete('hello')
// will remove hello from the Map
m.size()
// 1
```

### 03. Iterating Through a Map

One of the biggest improvements of a Map over an Object is the ability to iterate through the data structure in the order that the objects were added. In doing this we also have access to the value using destructuring. We can use a 'for, of' loop to get this done.

```js
for(const [k, v] of m){
    console.log(k, v)
}
// hello world
```