# 1101. Cloudy

BONG , WENT THE INTERCOM, followed by a cabin announcement:「Ladies and gentlemen, as we begin our descent into the San Francisco area, please make sure your seat backs and tray tables are in their full upright position, that your seat belt is securely fastened, and all carry-on luggage is stowed underneath the seat in front of you or in the overhead lockers. Thank you.」

The plane was descending now, and my ears were beginning to pop. I had that feeling of anticipation — that my life was going to start again after the suspended animation of airplane flight. This journey had pressed the pause button on my life, in exchange for a taste of omnipotence. Up here, the clouds couldn't rain on me; they couldn't tyrannically blot out the light and sway my mood as they do at home in London. Up here, the light streamed in through the window, warming my face with a glow from a sun that never set. Never, that is, until the plane suddenly descended into the cloud layer; then, not only did the sun disappear, but it was abruptly replaced by a white haze that knocked all sense of omnipotence and security out of me: white out!

The cloud we had descended into, like all clouds, was comprised of liquid droplets of almost pure water. The almost bit is interesting; it's the reason why rainwater isn't pure, why windows get stained by rain, and why fog forms in some places and not others. The water in clouds is neither pure nor innocent — it can kill. Night and day, somewhere on the planet, lightning storms are raging, at a pretty constant rate of fifty lightning flashes per sec ond, globally. It's estimated that there are more than a thousand human deaths by lightning per year, with the injured numbering in the tens of thousands. The US National Weather Service keeps a running total of the deaths, and the particulars of the fatalities. The table shows some of the entries for 2016. You'll see that taking shelter under a tree is not a good idea, and that danger can strike almost anywhere. But can lightning get to you on a plane? That is a question worth answering.

Day

State

City

Age

Sex

Location

Activity

Fri

LA

Larouse

28

F

In tent

Attending Music Festival

Fri

FL

Hobe Sound

41

M

Grassy Field

Family Picnic

Fri

FL

Boynton Beach

23

M

Near Tree

Working in yard

Wed

MS

Mantachie

37

M

Outside Barn

Riding Horse

Wed

LA

Slidell

36

M

Construction Site

Working

Mon

FL

Manatee County

47

M

Farm

Loading Truck

Fri

FL

Daytona Beach

33

M

Beach

Standing in water

Sat

MO

Festus

72

M

Yard

Standing with dob

Mon

MS

Lumberton

24

M

Yard

Standing

Sun

LA

Pineville

45

M

Parking Lot

Walking to car

Thu

TN

Dover

65

F

Under tree

Camping

Thu

LA

Baton Rouge

70

M

Sheltering under tree

Roofing

Thu

AL

Redstone Arsenal

19

M

Outside building

Outdoor maintenance

Thu

VA

Bedford County

23

M

Along roadway

Walking

Sat

NC

Yancey County

54

M

Putting on rain gear

Riding Motorcycle

Tue

CO

Arvada

23

M

Sheltering under tree

Golfing

Tue

AL

Lawrence County

20

M

In yard under tree

Watching Storm

Wed

AZ

Coconino County

17

M

Near mountain top

Hiking

Fri

UT

Flaming Gorge

14

F

On reservoir

Riding jetski

A table of deaths caused by lightning in the United States, collected by the National Weather Service.

Clouds start off as wet laundry on a line, as a puddle on the pavement, as a glow of perspiration on your upper lip, as part of a vast ocean of water. Every second, some of the H 2 O molecules leave wet laundry, puddles, upper lips, oceans, and other bodies of water, and make their way into the air. The boiling point of water is 212ºF, denoted as the temperature at which pure liquid turns into a gas at sea level. So how does liquid water become a gas without reaching this temperature? What's the point of defining the boiling point if water can cheat and dry laundry and upper lips, evaporate puddles, and denude oceans autonomously, at much lower temperatures?

As it turns out, the definitions of solids, liquids, and gases are not as clear-cut as they might seem, and the game that scientists play, of categorizing the world and making neat distinctions between different things, is constantly being sabotaged by the complexity of the universe. To understand how water cheats the system to create clouds, we have to think about an important concept called entropy.

The water clinging to your laundry on a clothesline is below 212ºF in temperature, but it is in contact with air. The molecules in the air bombard your washing, crashing into it as they move chaotically; occasionally, in all the mayhem, an H 2 O molecule pings off to become part of the air. It takes some energy to do this, as the bonds that attach the H 2 O molecules to your wet clothes have to be broken. Taking the energy away from your clothes cools them, but it also means that if the H 2 O molecule floating around in the air were to collide again with your washing, it would gain energy by sticking to it, thus making it wetter again. So on average you might think that more water would stick back onto your clothing than would be carried away by the air currents of the wind. But here's where entropy comes into play. Because the amount of air billowing around your laundry is so great, and the number of water molecules is so low, the chances of a water molecule finding its way back onto your favorite cotton T-shirt is small. Instead, it is more likely to be whizzed up into the atmosphere. This propensity of the world of molecules to get jumbled up and spread out is measured by the entropy of the system. Increasing entropy is a natural law of the universe, and it opposes the forces of condensa tion that bond the water back onto your washing. The colder the temperature and the less exposed your laundry is to the wind, the more you tip the balance in favor of condensation, and your washing stays wet. In contrast, by hanging your washing on a line on a warm day, you tip the balance in favor of entropy, and your clothes get dry.

Entropy also takes care of puddles in the street, dries your bathroom after you've been in the shower, and removes the sweat from your body on a hot day. All in all, entropy seems very convenient, and generally quite helpful, given how much we like having dry clothes and bathrooms, and cool bodies. But that same benevolent force also drives the killer clouds that strike us down in the thousands every year by throwing their lightning bolts around, reminding us who's really the boss in our atmosphere.

The process of thundercloud formation starts with vaporized H 2 O, which moves around as a gas. Hot air rises because it's less dense than cold air, so on a sunny day the water molecules make their way from your washing up into the atmosphere. The air, though full of water, is transparent, so at first there won't be any sign of a cloud. But as the vapor goes higher, the air expands and cools, and the thermodynamic balance is tipped toward H 2 O molecules preferring to condense and be part of a liquid again. But a single molecule can't just turn back into liquid in midair; to form a tiny droplet of water requires some coordination — several H 2 O molecules all have to come together to become a single droplet. In the chaotic, turbulent atmosphere, this doesn't happen easily, but the process is expedited by the tiny bits of particulate matter that are already in the air — often small bits of dust that have blown off trees and plants, or smoke from factory chimneys. The H 2 O molecules can attach themselves to these, and as more and more of them join together, the particle becomes the center of a tiny droplet of water. This is why when you collect rainwater, it generally contains sediment, and why when the rain dries onto your car windshield or the windows of your house, it leaves a fine powder.

This piece of physics was at the heart of one of the most extraordinary experiments of the twentieth century — when scientists took it upon themselves to control the weather. The method was called cloud seeding, and it was invented in 1946 by Vincent Schaefer, an American scientist. Schaefer and his team determined that if you dispersed silver iodide crystals into the atmosphere, they would act as dust or smoke might, and become the nucleating droplets — the seeds — of clouds, which would, in turn, produce snow and rain. The technique is an art as much as it is a science, but as widely used as it's been for decades, many dispute its effectiveness.

Still, though, the USSR seeded clouds over Moscow every year. Their aim was to clear moisture from the air by making it rain, ensuring that their May Day celebrations were accompanied by blue skies. The US military employed the technique for a different aim during the Vietnam War — they used it to extend the monsoon season on the Ho Chi Minh Trail; this was called Operation Popeye, and its mission was to「make mud not war.」Today countries around the world, like China, India, Australia, and the United Arab Emirates, all experiment with cloud seeding as a means to tackle drought conditions. Of course, by seeding the air you control only one aspect of the weather: cloud formation. So if the moisture content of the air is low, no amount of cloud seeding will make it rain. But if the air is full of water, then using this technique to increase snowfall over ski resorts, or reduce the risk of hail damage on crops during storms, can be productive. In the aftermath of the Chernobyl nuclear disaster in 1986, cloud seeding was used to make enough rain to remove radioactive particles from the atmosphere.

Airplanes don't need to use silver iodide to seed clouds. If you look up into the sky on a sunny day, you'll often see contrails emanating from the back of a jet aircraft. This isn't smoke spewing out of a badly maintained engine; it's a cloud seeded by the engine emissions. Small particles from the combustion process are emitted from the plane, along with an enormous amount of very hot gas. The gas pushes the aircraft forward, and while you might expect it to be too hot for water to form, at high altitudes the temperature is so low that the exhaust is quickly cooled. The emission particles become sites of nucleation for liquid droplet formation, which then freeze, first becoming water, and then tiny ice crystals. Contrails are just high, wispy cirrus clouds.

Depending on conditions in the air, contrails might last for just a few minutes, or maybe for a few hours, and the sheer number of them (there are a hundred thousand flights per day, globally, all producing contrails) has led many to suspect that contrails must have an effect on Earth's climate. Common sense tells you that clouds cool our planet; if you've sat on the beach on a cloudy day, you'll have experienced this. But clouds don't just reflect sunlight back into space. They also trap heat from the ground, in the form of infrared waves, and bounce it back to Earth. It's an effect that's particularly noticeable in winter, when clear skies create colder conditions than cloudy skies, because at night the heat that's lost from the ground is bounced back by clouds. And different cloud types (distinguished by color, density, and size) at different heights have different effects. All of which is to say, determining whether contrails have a net warming effect or a net cooling effect on Earth's average temperature is an outstanding scientific question.

Investigating this question requires being able to study Earth's climate in the absence of contrails and compare average temperatures with and without. But there are always aircraft flying somewhere in the stratosphere. When planes land for the night in America, they are just taking off in the Far East and Australia, and when they stop flying there, European planes take off, and so it goes — it's a 24/7 global operation. There are more than a million people in the air at any given moment. The only time this was not true in recent memory was after the terrorist attack on the Twin Towers in New York. All planes were grounded in the United States for three days after September 11, 2001. The measurements from four thousand meteorological stations across the United States showed that on 9/11 the difference between daytime and nighttime temperatures was, on average, 1.8ºF higher than usual. This, of course, is just one study and at one time of year, autumn. It's quite possible that in winter, spring, and summer, when cloud coverage and the localized climate would be different, the net effect of contrails would be to decrease temperatures, not increase them. There's a lot of ongoing work in this area, but it will never be an easy matter to resolve; our climate is complex. Certainly, it's hard to imagine a time when we'll be able to collect more data from a complete no-fly scenario, given that flying is such an important part of global culture. Nevertheless, scientists have widely discussed the possibility of controlling global temperatures through seeding clouds, and whether that would have the potential to avert some of the effects of climate change. Many suspect that they could manage solar radiation by increasing the reflectivity of the atmosphere by making clouds whiter.

The deliberate manufacture of contrails seems like an obvious way of testing that theory, and although such experiments are highly controversial, there are some who think they're already being carried out in secret. Contrail conspiracy theorists argue that some contrails stay in the sky for too long, and that the only way that could be happening is if they're being created by aerosols and other chemicals. Some of the conspiracy theorists go further still and argue that the contrails are evidence that governments have been spraying liquids across their territories, with the aim of psychologically manipulating the population through chemical means.

These conspiracies play off legitimate fears that we could be manipulated and poisoned through the water we drink. The danger is real; the water supply has historically been responsible for the mass poisoning of whole communities. It still goes on in modern times; for instance, as recently as 2014, the entire city of Flint, Michigan, was poisoned by lead in the water due to government incompetence. The outbreak of cholera in Yemen, which began in 2016 and is now nearing one million cases, was caused by the breakdown of a clean water supply. Not surprisingly, the fear of mass infection and poisoning has been a common motif in fiction, perhaps most famously in the film Dr. Strangelove, in which General Jack D. Ripper identifies the fluoridation of water as a Communist plot to undermine the American way of life:「I can no longer sit by and allow the international Communist conspiracy to sap and impurify all of our precious bodily fluids,」says General Ripper, before initiating a nuclear attack on the USSR.

This movie, perhaps the greatest film to examine the circumstances under which a nation might initiate nuclear war, is right to identify the adulteration of water as a potential motive for global conflict. We all need clean water to drink — we cannot live without it — and if our water is adulterated or contaminated, it will bring about death and disease on an epic scale. The pandemics of cholera in the nineteenth century killed tens of millions of people before anyone understood that the disease was brought on by waterborne bacteria.

And as with all liquids, water is very hard to control. It goes everywhere, eventually, moving from lakes to rivers to oceans and up into the skies. Thus the fear of water contamination is as great today as ever, and yet the water coming down from the clouds, the origin of most of the water we drink, is equally difficult to protect. Clouds know no territorial boundaries; one nation's experiments, disasters, or actions can and do affect the rest of the world in the most intimate way.

Dr. Strangelove was made as a satire, but the suspicion and fear surrounding the potential contamination of what we put into our bodies are real and will probably never go away.「Foreign substances introduced into our precious bodily fluids without the knowledge of the individual, certainly without any choice, that's the way your hardcore Commie works,」says General Jack D. Ripper. But replace「Commie」with「federal government,」or「capitalist corporation,」or「scientist,」or even「environmentalist,」 and you have the essence of most arguments against any number of policies concerning vaccination, water chlorination, or even power generation. There are countless examples of this — just look at acid rain.

Coal often contains impurities in the form of sulfates and nitrates, which become sulfur dioxide and nitrogen oxide gases when the coal is burned. These gases rise and become part of the atmosphere, and then dissolve in the liquid droplets that make up clouds. The presence of these gases makes those droplets acidic, so when they return to earth in the form of rain, they acidify the rivers and lakes and soil, killing fish and plants, and destroying forests. Acid rain also corrodes buildings, bridges, and other infrastructure, and it often does so very far away from where the original emissions — the gases from the coal — came from. It falls in a different country from where it was initially emitted, becoming a political issue as well as an environmental one. The cause of acid rain was identified during the industrial revolution in the nineteenth century, but it wasn't until the 1980s that the West, the main producer of acid rain, made a concerted effort to combat it.

The nuclear disaster at Chernobyl in Ukraine in 1984 caused another pan-national problem carried by clouds. When it became clear that the radioactive elements from the explosion at the power station had become airborne, everyone knew that the prevailing winds would determine which countries would be affected. The UK was one of those countries, with sheep farmers in England and Wales suffering from radioactive rain falling on their land, becoming a part of the soil and grasses. If swift preventive measures had not been taken to stop sheep from eating this grass, they would have become radioactive too. It was only in 2012, twenty-six years after the Chernobyl explosion, that restrictions were finally lifted by the UK Food Standards Agency on sheep being raised in the affected regions.

The world is a connected place. It's connected through the clouds and the rain showers they produce, and in another sense, it's connected through airplane travel. As I gazed out the window into the whiteness, I found it hard to reconcile a cloud as being fundamentally liquid. The individual droplets that make up a cloud are of course too small to see, but they are also transparent. So why are clouds white?

Well, while light from the sun passes straight through many of the droplets in a cloud, sooner or later it will hit a droplet and be reflected, just as the sun is reflected off the surface of a lake. This bounces the light off in another direction, so it hits another droplet and is reflected again. This continues, and the ray of light is bounced around like a pinball until it leaves the cloud. When it finally reaches your eyes, you see a pinprick of light originating from the last droplet of water that the light bounced off. The same happens to all the other rays of light that hit the cloud, so that what your eye sees is billions of pinpricks of light originating from all over the cloud. Some will have taken longer routes and lost their brightness, and so that part of the cloud will appear darker. Your brain tries to make sense of all these pinpricks of light. It is used to interpreting shades of light and dark in reference to a three-dimensional object, which has material characteristics that correlate with what you are seeing. This is why clouds appear to be objects, sometimes fluffy as if made of wool, and sometimes denser, as if they might be a floating mountain. Of course, another bit of your brain denies all this, and points out to your subconscious that these are not objects at all, but tricks of the light. Still, even knowing this, it's hard to see clouds as just an agglomeration of water droplets.

Much of the beauty of the sky is due to clouds and their water content. It affects the light we perceive in myriad ways and is one of the main reasons why different places in the world are so sublimely different in terms of light. But as the tiny droplets that make up a cloud become more dense, it becomes harder and harder for light to bounce its way through from top to bottom, and the cloud appears dark gray. We all know what this means, especially in Britain — it's going to rain. The tiny spherical water drops that are floating in the cloud start to get bigger, and gravity begins to exert a greater force on them. When the droplets are just the size of tiny dust particles, buoyancy and air convection currents exert a far greater force on them than gravity does, so they just float around like dust. But as they get bigger, gravity starts to dominate, pulling them down toward Earth and turning them into rain. If we're lucky, that is; otherwise they may form a storm cloud, the very storm clouds that kill hundreds of people every year.

Storm clouds are made under a very particular set of circumstances. As droplets experience cold air, water vapor changes from a gas back into a liquid. It's the opposite of what happens when your wet clothes dry on a clothesline. In doing so, it gives off energy in the form of heat — we call this latent heat. Latent heat is emitted from H 2 O molecules while they're still inside the cloud, meaning the air in the cloud gets warmer. As we know, warm air rises, so the cloud bulges out at the top. That's how puffy cumulus clouds are made. But if all that happens while a lot of warm, humid air is rising up from the ground — as might happen on a summer's day — then the convection currents pushing the cloud droplets upward might be strong enough to reverse the rain and send it upward too; the droplets will go miles into the sky, until the air carrying them finally cools enough to stop rising. That high up in the atmosphere, the rain droplets freeze, become ice particles, and then fall again, but depending on the climatic conditions, they might be pushed upward again by still more warm air. Meanwhile the cloud is getting bigger and taller, and darker and darker, a cumulus cloud being transformed into a cumulonimbus cloud — a storm cloud. The convection currents pushing the droplets up increase to speeds of sixty miles per hour, and the cloud becomes a complex swirl of activity, with ice particles falling through an updraft of air that's carrying still more droplets, all of which are colliding violently over several miles.

The scientific community still isn't sure how the conditions in side a cumulonimbus cloud lead to the buildup of electric charge. But we do know that, as it does on the ground, the electricity arises due to the movement of charged particles, which originate from atoms. All atoms share a common structure: a central nucleus containing positively charged particles called protons, surrounded by negatively charged particles called electrons. Occasionally some of the electrons break free and start moving around; this is the basis of electricity. When you rub a balloon on a wool sweater, you create charged particles on the balloon. Then, if you hold that balloon up to your head, your hair will move in response to the charges on the balloon, attracting the opposite charges on your hair. Negative charge ultimately wants to be reunited with positive charge, and it stretches your hair toward the balloon in order to accomplish this, causing your hair to stand on end. If the amount of charge were higher, there would be enough energy for the charged particles to jump through the air, creating a spark.

In a cloud, instead of gently rubbing balloons you have water droplets and ice particles, all turbulently crashing into one another with tons of energy, giving some of the ice particles a positive charge as they're carried to the top of the cloud, and some of the raindrops a negative charge as they fall to the bottom. This separation of positive and negative charges over many miles of cloud is driven by the energy of the winds inside the cloud. But the attractive force between the positive and negative is still there — they want to get back together, which is to say there is a voltage building up inside the cloud. It can get so large, reaching hundreds of millions of volts, that it strips electrons away from the molecules in the air itself. When this occurs, it happens very quickly, triggering the release of an electric charge that flows between the cloud and Earth, or between the top and the bottom of the cloud, depending on the conditions. The discharge is so big that it glows white-hot — it's lightning. And thunder is the sonic boom of the surrounding air rapidly expanding as it's heated to tens of thousands of degrees in temperature.

The energy of lightning is so huge that it can and does vaporize people, hence the high death toll. Electricity always flows down the path of least resistance — it's like a liquid in that respect. But while liquids flow down gravitational fields, electricity flows down electric fields, and since air doesn't conduct electricity very well, it has high resistance to the flow of electricity. Humans, on the other hand, are composed mostly of water, which does conduct electricity well. So if you're a lightning bolt emanating from a thundercloud, trying to find the path of least resistance to Earth, a person is often your best vehicle. While lightning might prefer to go through a tree because it's taller and longer, and thus more of the conductive path can go through its watery branches, if a person is sheltering under that tree, then the lightning might, and often does, jump over to the person on the last part of its journey to Earth.

Throughout a lot of the world, the tallest structures are often buildings, and in the West, for a long time, the tallest building in any town or city was a church. Many early church spires were made of wood, and they would burst into flames when lightning hit them. Fortunately, in 1749, Benjamin Franklin realized that if you just placed a metal electrical conductor on top of buildings and connected that to the ground with a piece of conducting wire, you'd give the lightning an easier path down and thus avoid a lot of the destruction caused by lightning strikes. These conducting wires are still used today and continue to save hundreds of thousands of tall buildings from being damaged by lightning. The same principle explains why being inside a car protects you from lightning: if the lightning strikes the car, it will be conducted around the outside of the metal bodywork, a path less resistant than going through the passengers.

Which brings us to aircraft and the dangers of lightning. When an aircraft is flying through a storm cloud, the turbulent air causes the aircraft to shake and roll, to drop or rise suddenly as the pressure changes. If, in the midst of this, there's lightning in the clouds, the plane will most likely become a part of that lightning's conductive path. As we know, many older aircraft are built from an aluminum alloy fuselage, and, as it would in a car, the metal protects the passengers from the lightning's charge. But the carbon fiber composites that modern passenger aircraft are made of don't conduct electricity very well (the epoxy glue holding the carbon fibers together is an electrical insulator), so, to compensate for this, aircraft-grade carbon fiber has conductive metal fibers built into its composite structure, ensuring that when lightning strikes, it travels around the skin of the aircraft and doesn't harm the passengers. So while aircraft get struck fairly frequently — once a year on average — there haven't been any recorded accidents on planes as a result of lightning strikes in over fifty years. In other words, it's more dangerous to be on the ground, under a tree, during a lightning storm than in an airplane. They don't mention this in the preflight safety briefing, even though it makes flying much safer. But — as already discussed — the preflight briefing is not really about safety.

By now my plane was getting pretty close to the ground, relatively speaking. As we continued to reduce altitude on our approach to San Francisco International Airport, the low clouds kept us from seeing much out the window. The San Francisco Bay Area is prone to fog. Fog, like clouds, is a liquid dispersion of water droplets in air: it's essentially a cloud at ground level. Fog seems harmless enough if you're looking out at it from a snug house, warmed by a log fire, sipping a glass of brandy — it gives the city an air of romanticism, a sense that mysterious new things are possible. But if you're walking on a moor or driving on a highway or skiing down a mountain or descending at a rate of thirty feet per second in an airplane, fog means just one thing — potential death. The history of sea fogs and ships dashed upon rocks as a result of the crew's not being able to see these hazards is still a very real and frightening part of seafaring life. Fog can close airports and can cause airplanes, unless they are fitted with modern fly-by-wire systems, to abort landings. Fog is scary, fog is dangerous — and perhaps that's why celebrations of the dead, like Halloween, are often held at times of the year when fog and mist are prevalent.

Fog forms at ground level for the same reason that clouds form in the sky. Damp, humid air cools, and as a result the H 2 O in the air liquefies into fine droplets of water. Just like at high altitudes, the formation of droplets requires a site of nucleation, and traditionally, in cities, that was provided by smoke from fires that were used for cooking or for keeping houses warm. But in modern times the nucleation sites usually stem from the exhaust from factory chimneys and cars. When there's a chronic excess of that kind of pollution, a thick fog called smog will form, often hovering for days on end, capturing the pollution and keeping it above the city. In London, the recorded history of smog goes back to 1306, when King Edward I banned coal fires for a period of time to try to combat the problem. The smog got so bad, at times you couldn't see your hand in front of your face. But despite Edward's efforts, smog continued to plague London for centuries, until the Great Smog of 1952, which was so lethal that it killed four thousand people in just four days, provoking the government to pass the country's first clean-air laws.

San Francisco often experiences dense fog. This is due to a combination of conditions that bring the warm, damp air of the Pacific Ocean over the city, where it then cools and condenses into fog as a result of car exhaust emissions. We were descending into just such a fog now, and despite knowing that those at the controls of the aircraft and on the ground at the airport are accustomed to these conditions and know how to make a safe landing in them, I felt myself becoming increasingly anxious as we continued to descend toward the ground while outside there was nothing to see but white spookiness.

Bong went the intercom.「Flight attendants, please prepare for landing.」The safety-critical moment had arrived — we were going in. The cabin fell silent, except for the drone of engines and the blast of the air conditioning. Everyone seemed to be tuning in to the same anxiety. Occasionally the fog would clear enough for me to catch sight of some feature on the ground, a tree or a car, but then the whiteness would reassert itself, and the aircraft would wobble or drop as the engines warbled away into my fearful ear.

As we got lower and lower, I felt more and more tense. I know, rationally, that flying is the safest form of long-distance travel, but I'm always worried about being the exception. The deadly fog was outside. We were all strapped in, including the cabin staff, who were looking out at us impassively. They did this several times a week. How did they cope, I wondered, with this last part of the flight, this part when it's clear that our lives are in the hands of the pilots' ability to cope with something unseen and unexpected? Only supercool Susan seemed unaffected; she'd put her book down and was looking out of the window serenely, clearly completely confident that our imminent collision with the ground would be a success.