# 0701. Refreshing

「 TEA OR COFFEE, SIR? 」the flight attendant asked, shunting his trolley along the aisle. Most of the shades were drawn down in the aircraft cabin, but the gloom was punctuated with shafts of light from a few uncovered windows, revealing an unsetting sun outside. We were six hours into an eleven-hour flight; a general feeling of lethargy prevailed. The flight attendants looked weary.

I like coffee; in fact, I love coffee. But I drink it black, as a stimulant, not for refreshment. At forty thousand feet, I didn't feel like being stimulated. On the other hand, tea made by someone who doesn't know how to make it is worse than a bad cup of coffee. Why is that? I thought, as the attendant looked at me with a combination of boredom and impatience.

「Tea or coffee?」he asked again.

I glanced down at my neighbor's drink, which had been placed on her tray table. It was coffee in a plastic cup with a handle so small, it wasn't actually functional. Susan had been given a plastic bag too, with packets of milk and sugar, a little stirring stick, and a napkin. It didn't look appealing; I knew I wasn't going to enjoy it. It all seemed a bit cold and institutional.

「Tea,」I said, and then immediately added,「Is it hot? I mean, is it made with really hot water?」But my questions were drowned out by the drone of the aircraft engines, or maybe the flight attendant was just choosing to ignore me. He poured the tea into a cup identical to Susan's, and handed it to me on a tray with my own plastic bag of condiments.

What should a cup of tea taste like? What I'm looking for with my first sip is a savory briskness that ignites all my taste buds: not in a show-off cappuccino-with-froth-and-chocolate-sprinkles kind of way, but in a subtle, determined wave of lapping pleasure, the kind that elicits an involuntary, audible「Ah!」of satisfaction. I want to immediately taste the leafiness of the tea, not by swallowing gritty fragments of the actual leaves, but through an astringent feel in my mouth, dry enough to sweep away the taste of the stale cabin air. I want a balance to the flavor, a battle between sweet and bitter that's won by neither, with a slightly salty aftertaste. If there is sourness from the acidity, I want it to be minimal, just enough to lift the fruity, fermented flavors of the tea up to my nose and to invigorate me. Color is important; a black tea needs to be gloriously golden and transparent, and not so dark that I can't see the bottom of the cup. Ideally, I'd like to spot this before the tea has been served to me, while it's being poured out of a teapot. I also want to hear the gurgle of the liquid filling the cup, reminding me of all those moments in my life (so unlike the present one) when I've been at home with my family, drinking a cup of tea at the kitchen table.

With all that anticipation brewing, I took a sip.

It was horrible.

The tea tasted like a warm cup of flat Coke, but without the sweetness. I tasted it again to see if I'd missed anything. This time I got a twang of the unpleasant plastic taste of the cup. Out of the corner of my eye I regarded Susan, who was reading her book and sipping her coffee contentedly. Clearly, I had made the wrong choice.

But tea is reputed to be the most popular hot drink in the world. Although getting reliable facts on the topic is difficult, in Britain it is estimated that 165 million cups of tea are drunk on average every day. That compares to 70 million cups of coffee. The picture is similar in many other countries worldwide. So what does tea offer that coffee does not? And more important: why is tea often made so badly?

My cup of tea started its life as some new shoots on a seemingly unremarkable evergreen shrub that thrives only in tropical or subtropical climates. You could walk past this plant and never know it was the source of so much delight — our ancestors did so for thousands of years. The shrub likes humidity and rainfall, but not high temperatures, and so there are a handful of places that are ideal for growing it, like the high altitudes of Yunnan province in China, the mountains of Japan, the Himalayas of Darjeeling in India, and the central highlands of Sri Lanka. The best tea in the world, or at least the most expensive, is Da Hong Pao from the Wuyi Mountains in China; a couple of pounds can easily sell for a million dollars.

A tea plantation.

The geographical location, the altitude, and the exact conditions of the individual growing season all affect the taste of the tea leaves. One of the major headaches for tea manufacturers is to figure out how to blend tea from many different geographical locations in a way that maintains a consistent taste for their product month after month, year after year.

Although there are many types of tea, they all come from the same plant, Camellia sinensis. The difference between green and black teas (and the other variants such as white, yellow, oolong, and so on) is how the leaves are processed. Every season, all the new shoots of the tea plant are picked by hand. They immediately start to wilt, which triggers enzymes that break down the molecular machinery of the leaves, turning the green chlorophyll pigment first brown, and then black. If you have ever left a bunch of herbs too long in your fridge, you will have witnessed this effect.

Green teas are produced by heating the leaves immediately after picking. The heat deactivates the enzymes, and so keeps the chlorophyll intact, and thus the green color too. Often the leaves are then rolled, which bruises their cell walls, allowing the molecules responsible for the flavor to be easily extracted. The flavor palette of green tea is made up of astringency, from a family of molecules called polyphenols (you'll remember them from the tannins in wine); bitterness, from the caffeine molecules; sweetness, from sugars; silkiness, from pectins; a savory, brothy taste from the amino acids; and a bouquet of aromatic oils. It's the careful balance of these different elements, rather than the maximum extraction of each, that yields a great cup of tea.

Black teas are produced from the same leaves as green teas — they are just prepared differently. In the case of black tea, after the leaves wilt, they are rolled, and their enzymes help break down the molecular machinery through a reaction with the oxygen in the air. This is a process called oxidation, and it changes the color from green to dark brown, producing a different set of flavor molecules. Many of the polyphenols, like the bitter tannins, are transformed into more savory and fruity-tasting molecules. Because these molecules that make up the flavor of black tea are the result of the oxidation, they are not so susceptible to being destroyed by subsequent reactions with the oxygen in the air. Thus, after drying, black teas can be stored for longer periods of time than green teas without losing their flavor.

Job done, you might be thinking. Just add water to whichever of these teas sounds best, and you'll have a refreshing drink. But tea can be ruined all too easily. Another caffeine-based drink, such as Coke, will be very similar in taste wherever and whenever you drink it. This is because the brewing process is controlled in a factory, and the flavor of the drink is not significantly impaired by being stored and transported. Thus, much of the potential for error has been removed. You can serve it at the wrong temperature (according to your preference), or in the wrong vessel (also according to your preference), but the chemical composition of the Coke is going to be reliably the same each time you order it. Inventors have long tried to do the same for tea by liquefying tea extracts to create an instant tea beverage that can be made in vending machines. So far, drinks made this way have never caught on, perhaps because they taste almost completely unlike a refreshing cup of tea. Why? The reason is thought to be that many of the key chemical components that give tea its distinctive flavor degrade and disappear soon after brewing.

Liquid instant-tea products.

The author George Orwell, most famous for classics of political fiction like 1984 and Animal Farm, cared so much about the problem of bad tea that he published a treatise on the drink: his eleven rules for making a perfect cup of tea. These rules include the necessity of brewing tea in a teapot, the importance of warming the pot, and the requirement that milk be added to the cup after the tea has been poured. Science doesn't offer a definitive view on what constitutes the perfect cup of tea, but does confirm some of Orwell's insights. Basically, there are four key variables that can drastically alter the quality of a cup of tea: the tea leaves, the water, the temperature of the brew, and the duration of the brewing process.

The more flavorful the tea leaves are, the more flavorful the cup of tea. But there is a catch. If we agree, even if George Orwell does not, that the best tea is the tea you personally enjoy the most, then if your favorite tea is brewed from standard teabags, it's safe to say that you're not going to find tea made from the extremely flavor ful and extremely expensive Da Hong Pao tea to be more refreshing. The notion of what is best is, ultimately, subjective — just as it is with wine, and indeed with most things. On the other hand, if you've never had the opportunity to drink a wide range of different teas (and there are approximately a thousand types available), there may yet be a more satisfying type of tea out there for you. As with wine, a discerning knowledge of the flavor profiles of tea requires real sophistication, and certain kinds can command very high prices. But the tea industry is also prone to some of the snobbish vices of the wine industry; the scarcity of a tea and clever marketing don't necessarily translate into a high-quality product. There is also such an enormous breadth of tea — from green tea, to oolong, to the yerba maté of South America, to the black teas of Sri Lanka — that discovering what you like can be time consuming. Personally, my perfect cup of tea changes throughout the day. In the morning, when I've just woken up, I like strong breakfast tea with milk — I find it comforting, alerting, but not too demanding. Later, I crave a black Earl Grey tea — the subtle combination of citrus and bergamot punch through the dreariness of a gray rainy afternoon.

I wondered what kind of tea Susan preferred, if any — or perhaps she wasn't a tea drinker. The problem with people who aren't tea drinkers is that I never know what to offer them when they visit me at home.「Would you like a cup of tea?」is the most welcoming phrase I know. It often rolls off my tongue before a visitor has even closed the door. The offer sounds trivial but its meaning is multifaceted: it means「Welcome to my home」; it means「I care about you」; it means「I have these delicious dried leaves that were harvested and processed thousands of miles away in an exotic climate; aren't I sophisticated?」 — well, it used to mean that, when tea was first popularized in Britain, in the eighteenth century. Since then, making a cup of tea has become the default British welcome ceremony, more customary than kissing, shaking hands, hugging, or any of the other, admittedly more intimate, welcome rituals practiced in other countries. Hence George Orwell's insistence on using a teapot; it isn't just a brewing vessel, it's a physical manifestation of sharing at the heart of a home. The care and attention lavished on the teapot, the sounds of it being filled with hot water, its aesthetic appearance, the time spent waiting for the brew, and the assembly of the cups are all part of the ritual.

When performing the welcoming tea ceremony, you have to use good water. It sounds obvious, but it appears that even Orwell overlooked this variable, and given that tea is mostly water, it's easy to see how that ingredient would have a marked effect on flavor. The taste of water varies, depending on its source. The vast difference in taste between what flows from a natural spring and from a kitchen tap are obvious, but even from place to place, tap water can taste radically different. The mineral content, the organic content, and the presence of chlorine and other additives are the primary sources of flavor and smell in a glass of water. If you want to brew a lively cup of tea, you'll need to use water with a bit of mineral in it. Pure distilled water tastes flat. Too high a mineral content won't work either; the flavor of the water overwhelms the flavors in the tea, which is true of highly chlorinated water as well. Normal tap water is usually fine, but the pH of the water has to be neutral. Acidic water often has a metallic taste from the corrosion of the metal pipes that carry water from source to tap, while alkaline water often tastes soapy. Mustiness tends to come from the byproducts of microorganisms. Sometimes, especially in the morning, water has been sitting in the pipes for a long time; if the pipes are old, or made from certain metals, or if there is acidity, they can corrode a bit, giving the water an off taste. If it seems that this is happening, just let the water run for a while before you fill the kettle. If you live in an area where the water is hard — meaning it has a lot of calcium dissolved in it, usually because of the underlying geology of the region — the calcium ions inside the water will combine with the organic molecules in the tea and form a solid film that floats at the top of the cup. This is called scum. Tea scum makes tea look less delightful; it can really ruin the welcoming tea ceremony. If you have hard water, you can get rid of the scum by filtering the water or by a using a teapot that captures it on its inside walls.

Once you've secured the right water, you've got to boil it. The temperature of the brew determines which flavor molecules will be dissolved into the water, and so determines the tea's balance of flavor and color. If the temperature is too low, many of the flavor molecules won't dissolve and the tea will not only be bland, but also have a weak color. But too high a temperature can be just as bad; too many of the tannins and polyphenols that give the tea its bitterness and astringency will dissolve. Green teas have an especially high concentration of these, so they're best brewed at 160ºF to 180ºF, if you want to avoid an excessively bitter or clawingly astringent cup.

Caffeine is a very bitter molecule and doesn't dissolve easily in water. If you want a high-caffeine tea, then you should boil your water to higher temperatures, so more of it will dissolve in the brew. Fortunately, because black teas have been oxidized, they have a reduced number of tannins and polyphenols, which allows them to be brewed at higher temperatures without becoming extremely bitter, so you can have a highly caffeinated cup that doesn't make you wince. Black tea brewed for five minutes at 212ºF will develop a dark, strong flavor, with a typical caffeine content of 0.001 ounce per cup (compared to 0.003 ounce for normal coffee). This, though, is where brewing tea onboard an aircraft can become problematic. At forty thousand feet, the pressure inside the cabin is lower than the atmospheric pressure at sea level, which lowers the boiling point of water, affecting the flavor of the brew. It's not just the initial temperature of the water that's important for brewing tea. In order for the molecules responsible for taste and color to dissolve successfully into the water, the leaves need to be in contact with the water for a specific duration of time. If the temperature of the water drops significantly during the brewing process, then fewer flavor molecules will be extracted. This will happen if you brew tea in a cold place, or if your brewing vessel is cold before you start steeping the tea, causing the hot water to drop in temperature as it warms the teapot. Hence, George Orwell's insistence that you warm the pot before making the tea. You can compensate for lower temperatures by brewing the tea for longer, but you won't get quite the same ratios of salty, sweet, bitter, sour, and savory, and the thousands of individual volatiles that provide the complexity in a perfectly brewed cup.

Here's the thing about tea: because it's so complex and many variables can affect its flavor profile (the kind of tea, the water, the brew time, and the temperature of the water), it's quite easy to lose focus. The result: you get a cup of tea that tastes completely unlike the cup you were hoping for. That's exactly what had happened to the cup of tea I was currently drinking. The flight attendants had done their best, compensating for the lower boiling point of the water on the plane with a longer brew time, and by making the tea in a warmed tall stainless-steel pot, which kept the temperature of the tea high throughout the brewing process. But it had taken them a while to get to me with their trolley, probably fifteen minutes or so since they brewed the tea, and all that time it had just been sitting there, getting cooler and less flavorful by the second. When they finally poured it into my little plastic cup, it had lost most of its fruity and leafy flavors; it had plenty of savory quality, but it was cold, bitter, and acidic, and the plastic cup itself had a distinct sharp flavor. All of this meant that I didn't get that refreshing, thirst-quenching experience I'd been hoping for — quite the reverse. It was borderline disgusting. I should never have ordered it.

But then I made another mistake. I thought I might be able to rescue the disappointing, boring brown liquid, transform it into something palatable, by using the contents of the little plastic bag the flight attendant had given me. I opened the cylindrical tub of milk and poured it into the cup, using the polystyrene stick to stir the mixture. The color of the tea turned from dark brown to milky ocher — a very pleasing color. I like milky tea. Cows' milk is sweet and contains a good amount of salt and fat. The fat in milk is shaped in small droplets, each about a thousandth of a millimeter in size, and they give a lot of flavor and a rich mouthfeel to the milk. When milk is poured into tea, those droplets of fat disperse, dominating the color and taste of the drink. They give it a malty, almost caramel flavor, and add a creaminess to the mouthfeel, which opposes tea's natural astringency. They also absorb a lot of the flavor molecules in the tea, reducing the fruitiness and bitterness, but making it creamier.

When to add the milk to your cup is a BIG bone of contention in Britain. There are those who advise adding it before the tea, on the grounds that the droplets of milk will be gently heated as more and more hot tea is added. This keeps the milk proteins from reaching temperatures that would transform their molecular structure, denaturing them and giving the milk a curdled, off flavor. Some people also argue that pouring the milk in first protects ceramic teacups from the thermal shock of the hot tea, thus keeping them from cracking; even if this was historically true, it's no longer an issue, as modern ceramics are much stronger. But for others, the very notion of pouring the milk in first is anathema. In their perfect cup of tea, you put the tea in first, and then the milk. George Orwell was in this camp, arguing that this allows you to add exactly the right amount of milk for your preferred level of creaminess.

You might doubt whether adding the milk before or after makes any difference to the taste — it being such a subtle distinction. But in an experiment now known as「the lady tasting tea,」the statistician Ronald Fisher investigated this question rigorously, inventing new statistical methods to do so. In his randomized tasting experiments, he found that yes, people can taste the difference between tea with milk poured in before or after the tea.

The methods that Fisher devised revolutionized the mathematical discipline of statistics. It unfortunately did not revolutionize tea making in Britain, so even now if you order a cup of tea in a café, very rarely will anyone acknowledge that the sequence of milk and tea makes any difference. This drives me absolutely mad. Often, in a train station for instance, a server just plonks a teabag into a cup of hot water, immediately sloshes in some milk, then hands the cup to you, as if to say,「I've added all the ingredients, so it must be tea.」「But you haven't asked me if I want the milk before or after,」I sometimes say, when my inner rage boils over. Not that I actually want milk added before. I'm with George Orwell on this; I want the milk added after. But I still want to be asked. I'm pretty sure Orwell would agree with me on this — the current trends represent the nadir of the tea-making tradition in Britain. It's still the national drink, but coffee may well replace it if this continues, because, unlike tea, the quality of coffee served throughout the country has gone up over the past few decades, largely because of a single piece of engineering: the espresso machine.

The coffee my neighbor, Susan, was drinking began life in a more tropical setting than my cup of tea had. Coffee typically grows in forests, in countries like Brazil or Guatemala, with high summer temperatures and plenty of rainfall. To protect itself against being eaten by animals and insects, the coffee bush, like the tea plant, has evolved chemical defenses in the form of powerful alkaloids like caffeine, which can disrupt the metabolism of an organism. Caffeine's bitterness is a biological signal from our mouth, warning us that we are about to drink something that may be toxic — but in the case of caffeine, we ignore it; why is that? It's probably because we've grown to like the effect of caffeine, as well as that of other naturally derived alkaloids, like nicotine, morphine, and cocaine. But of all these psychoactive substances, caffeine is the most widely consumed. It stimulates the nervous system, relieving us of drowsiness, making us more alert. It is also a diuretic, which means it increases the production of urine. The upshot is that after you drink a strong coffee, you often need the toilet. At high doses, caffeine can cause insomnia and anxiousness. Like alcohol, caffeine goes straight into the bloodstream, so its effects are immediately noticeable; and, as with the other alkaloids, it's addictive. Once you start drinking it regularly, it can be incredibly hard to stop; the withdrawal symptoms can be severe, giving you headaches, making you tired, crabby, sluggish.

The coffee we drink is ground from beans, which are the seeds of the coffee bush. They contain a lot of carbohydrates, in the form of sugars, which give the seed the energy it needs to produce new shoots. The bean also contains proteins, which provide the core molecular machinery for the plant and instruct the seed through the reproductive process — the growth of a new coffee plant. Once the beans ripen, they're harvested, fermented, removed from the pulp, and dried. At this point, they're hard pale-green beans. The next step is to roast them; this is where the huge array of flavor in coffee is developed. You can roast your own coffee if you want; I have done it in the past. I bought raw coffee beans from my local coffee supplier, put them into a stainless-steel sieve, and held a hot-air gun over them for a while, constantly shaking the sieve. I was able to roast enough beans to make a cup of coffee in about five minutes. If you love coffee, you should really give it a go; you'll learn so much about the drink.

Roasting coffee using a hot-air gun.

The first thing you'll notice as you heat up the beans is their changing color. They'll turn yellow first, as the sugars inside the bean begin to caramelize. Then, as the temperature increases, the water inside the bean starts to boil, and pressure from the steam starts to build up; you'll know this is happening when you hear the beans cracking open under pressure. As you heat them still more, the molecular constituents of the bean start to fall apart, but they also react with one another. This use of heat is very different from its role in the production of tea leaves. There, heat is used mostly to stop chemical reactions; with coffee, the roasting actually starts the chemical reactions that produce most of the flavor. One of the most important reactions occurs between the bean's proteins and its carbohydrates. This is called the Maillard reaction, and it happens when the bean reaches a temperature between 320ºF and 428ºF. The Maillard reaction produces a vast array of flavor molecules; when it starts, you can immediately smell them — this is when your beans get that characteristic coffee aroma, as well as many of their savory qualities. It's the same chemical reaction that makes the delicious crust when you're baking bread, and the tasty, crispy outer layer on a steak when you're roasting or frying the meat. The reaction changes the color of the bean from yellow to brown and produces carbon dioxide gas, which will eventually go on to produce the crema foam that sits on top of a cup of coffee. At this point you'll hear crackling from the beans, as their inner structure ruptures, a result of the gas building up inside them, causing them to swell in size.

If you keep roasting the beans, you'll start to see them turn a very dark brown as the acid and tannins break down, mellowing the flavor profile. Then you'll hear a second crack as their interior structure becomes increasingly brittle and weak. You'll observe small amounts of oil leaking onto the surface of the beans at this point, signaling the complete disintegration of the bean's cellular structure. These oils, which make up approximately 15 percent of the bean, leave a glossiness on the surface that's characteristic of a French roast. If you keep roasting past this point, you'll get a shinier bean, but also a less tasty one; the high temperatures break down the molecules into smaller structures, which produce less flavor. You'll also lose a lot of the soluble carbohydrates, which are responsible for the syrupy mouthfeel of coffee. In general, the blacker the beans, the more generic and simplistic the flavor profile.

A sketch of how the color and size of coffee beans change during roasting.

When you roast your own beans, you can play around with the flavor profiles as much as you want, until you find a style that perfectly suits your palate. Doing it myself gave me a deep respect for coffee manufacturers; even with two apparently simple variables — temperature and duration of the roast — you can create an enormous range of flavors with the same beans.

Once you've roasted the beans, you've got to extract all of their flavor and get it into your cup. The earliest known methods for grinding and brewing coffee are from fifteenth-century Yemen. Arab communities there ground the coffee with a simple mortar and pestle, added it to water, and then boiled the mixture. This is still a popular way of making coffee in the Middle East; it's often called Turkish coffee. Making coffee this way gives you a very strong, dark brew; the liquid contains not just the taste compounds of the coffee, but also the grounds themselves, which affect the mouthfeel of the drink, giving it a velvety texture. But this smooth ness can turn gritty as you get toward the end of the cup, where the bigger solids form a thick sediment on the bottom. Turkish coffee is also quite bitter; brewing the grounds at boiling point allows a lot of the highly bitter-tasting molecules, like caffeine, to dissolve into the water in large quantities. Generally, people mix a fair amount of sugar into their coffee to offset this, resulting in a bittersweet drink with a high caffeine content. Just what the doctor ordered, if you want to be hopped up on a strong wallop of flavor, combined with the one-two punch of a lot of sugar and caffeine. But as satisfying as this can be, brewing coffee this way does eliminate a lot of the fruity flavors from the bean's fermentation, and the nutty and chocolaty flavors you develop through the roasting.

Thus, we discover one of the biggest problems with coffee — it often smells better than it actually tastes. Why? Because so many of the aromas that should have been released inside your mouth have already been released into the air while the coffee was brewing, leaving behind just the bitterness and acidity, with very few of the aromatics. To keep from losing so much of the aroma during the brewing process, it's best to brew at lower temperatures. This also limits the bitterness and gives you coffee with a lower caffeine content.

While the velvety texture of Turkish coffee can be quite pleasant, those last sips of grit aren't great. As such, separating the coffee grounds from the liquid became a major objective in the brewing process — welcome the coffee filter. Making coffee by filtering it through a fine mesh or a filter paper allows the coffee to be brewed as the hot water comes in contact with the fine grains, but then the liquid drips through the filter, and into another collecting vessel, leaving the grains behind. The speed of the process is determined by how hard it is for the water to be pulled through the grounds. If there are too many grounds, or if the powder is too fine, then the water takes a long time to drip through, thus dropping in temperature, which makes it impossible for the liquid to extract all of the molecules that could give the drink flavor. Likewise, brewing the coffee with too much water, or too coarse grains, will give you a weak cup, with little body and too much acidity, because the water won't be in contact with the grains long enough.

But if you do it right, filtering will give you a warm pot of clear, golden, grain-free coffee. There won't be a crema, though. For a lot of people, the perfect cup of coffee has a crema floating on top of the liquid — a foam created by the carbon dioxide gas that's produced during the roasting process, then released from the ground beans while the coffee's brewing. When you use a coffee filter, all the carbon dioxide is released during the filtering. No matter, though; over the past four hundred years, many other brewing methods have been invented that preserve the crema, including the French press, the Moka coffeepot, and of course, the espresso machine.

Along with producing a crema, the French press generally works faster than a filter because the coffee grounds are first mixed with the water at about 212ºF, and as the coffee brews — usually for a few minutes (further brewing releases a diminishing return of flavor, and increases bitterness) — the temperature decreases to about 158ºF. So, the flavor molecules are, at first, extracted quite rapidly, as the surface of the coffee powder is exposed to the hot water, but that declines as the temperature goes down, and it becomes increasingly difficult for the water to access the interior of the particles. This is when the carbon dioxide is released from the grains and escapes to the surface of the pot, trapping the liquid and forming the crema. When the coffee's done brewing, you just have to plunge the filter of the French press to stop the brewing and trap the coffee grounds. If you pour the coffee immediately, you'll have a balanced, hot cup with that pleasing crema on top. To make stronger coffee without increasing its bitterness, you can use either lots of coarse grains or fewer fine grains, the problem with the latter being that they can escape through the plunge filter and make their way into your cup, and the problem with the former being that you won't be able to extract as much flavor from the grains.

A Moka pot used to make coffee.

One way around this dilemma is to use a Moka coffeepot. In this device, the water is kept separate from the coffee grounds, in a sealed compartment. When it's heated to a boil, the water produces hot steam, which increases the pressure in the pot, eventually reaching about one and a half times the atmospheric pressure and pushing the hot water through the coffee grains and into an upper compartment once its brewed. Using the Moka extracts a lot more flavor than the French press or a coffee filter can, and it makes a strong cup. The downside of the Moka, though, is that as the water level in the boiling chamber decreases, incredibly hot steam mixes with the water, and as that steam passes through the coffee grounds, its high temperature extracts a lot of bitterness, often giving the coffee a burnt edge.

The espresso machine refines the principles of the Moka to make the most reliable — and some say the best-tasting — coffee possible. The espresso machine, so named because it can make coffee fast, in thirty seconds, heats water to between 190ºF and 200ºF, and then puts it under intense pressure (about nine times atmospheric pressure) before pushing it through the coffee grounds. The high pressure extracts the maximum amount of flavor and, because the system doesn't rely on steam, it doesn't overdo the bitterness and astringency. The speed of the system is important: it means there is very little time for the volatiles from the coffee to escape into the air. So you end up with a full-bodied coffee, with a great balance of nutty, earthy, and savory flavors, both fruity and acidic, with a wine-like astringency.

Because the mechanisms of an espresso machine are so controlled, it produces great coffee every time, and it's incredibly fast. This is why it's used in most commercial coffee shops, and the number of drinks you can make with it seems to have no end. Served on its own, it's called an espresso. If you add hot water to it, you've got an Americano; equal amounts of hot milk and foamed milk make it a flat white; foamed milk on its own makes a cappuccino; and so on. As with tea, milk changes the flavor profile of coffee quite radically, smoothing the astringency but also flattening the flavor profile and replacing it with a maltier, creamier taste.

Airplanes use smaller versions of espresso machines to serve first-class passengers, but the coffee served to everyone else is made with a filter. Due to the lower air pressure on an aircraft, the boiling point of water is around 200ºF — which, incidentally, is perfect for coffee. That being said, coffee that's been kept warm for too long a period of time between brewing and drinking — as might happen on a plane, or in your office coffee machine — will lose a lot of its aromatic flavor, leaving you with just bitterness and astringency.

And that's not the only thing keeping you from enjoying that sort-of-hot airplane coffee. Studies have shown that our sensitivity to the five basic tastes — sweet, sour, salty, bitter, and umami — are affected by airplane noise, as well as our sense of smell. Because of this, it's impossible to taste the coffee you're drinking with the same nuance you might on the ground. This confirms my experience of flying; I generally don't enjoy coffee on planes as much as I think I'm going to.

So which drink is best — coffee or tea? Certainly, each one suits different moods and moments in life. But there are times, such as when you're on a plane in economy class, when you need to recognize that even if tea suits your mood, the chances of getting a good cup are so slim, you should just say no. I say this really as a note to myself. My cup of tea tasted terrible; the brewing temperature was too low, it was made from a bag, it had cooled down as the pot went down the aisle, the cup it was served in tasted of plastic, and the noise of the cabin dulled my senses so that whatever dismal flavor the tea had was muted. It was never going to give me that sense of contemplative stimulation I craved. In hindsight, I should have ordered coffee. Its stronger basic tastes stand up better to the cacophony of the cabin, its brewing temperature is more suited to forty thousand feet, and the filter method used on airplanes produces a balanced cup of coffee, albeit not the deepest flavor.

I noticed that Susan had finished her coffee and was about to get a refill from the flight attendant, who was walking down the aisle with a pot in his hand, raising his eyebrows at anyone who looked up. When you're in the window seat, there's never a good time to go to the loo, but I was bursting to go, perhaps because of the diuretic effects of the caffeine, and I figured if I could get past Susan before she had another cup of coffee on her tray table, I would be able to put the tea debacle behind me. I mimed my desire to exit, and she got up so that I could slide out and stagger stiff-legged up the darkened aisle to the dimly lit green signs that indicated LAVATORY .

