2 / Intoxicating

BY THE TIME WE were at cruising altitude—forty thousand feet—I was really enjoying myself, looking down from my window seat onto a layer of clouds, with the sun streaming over them into the cabin. I turned my head to the side and met my neighbor's gaze as she peered out the window too.

「It would be great to jump out now, wouldn't it, and dive into those big, fluffy, warm clouds,」I said.

「They're not warm,」she said.

「Er, no. You're right,」I said.「I'm sorry.」

Oh my God, did I really say that? I thought. Could it be the wine? Had it gone to my head already? I inspected the label of my miniature green-plastic bottle, which declared that the liquid I was drinking was a wine from Australia made from Chardonnay grapes. It was described as「full-bodied, with a vanilla buttery finish.」I took a sip to see if I could taste the vanilla. I couldn't. There was acidity there, and something floral. I inspected the label again. The wine was 13 percent alcohol.

Alcohols are chemically similar to kerosene: for a start, they burn, as you will have witnessed if you've ever ordered a flambé dessert. Usually brandy is used for fancy dishes like that because this spirit has a high percentage of alcohol, typically 40 percent; and this is what burns with a bluish flame on top of your dessert.

Pure alcohol is easy to burn too and indeed is used as a fuel for cars. Brazil is the primary producer of alcohol made from sugarcane, which it uses as a transport fuel. The country is considered to have one of the most sustainable biofuel economies in the world, with some proportion of alcohol being used to fuel 94 percent of Brazilian passenger vehicles. This alcohol is made by turning sugarcane into juice and fermenting that with yeast. This is the same process by which both wine and beer are made: yeast consumes sugar and produces alcohol. But with biofuels the alcohol is then refined into pure alcohol. Biofuel isn't as popular in other parts of the world as it is in Brazil in part because other fossil fuels are much cheaper to produce, but also because it requires lots of land to produce crops that yield alcohol at the scale needed to sustain the transport systems of whole countries. So, worldwide, these crops are mostly grown to produce alcohol for drinking.

Alcohol is a key component of some of the world's most popular drinks, such as wine, beer, and spirits, but it is toxic. It is that toxicity that makes these drinks so intoxicating. That's where the word comes from. The toxins in alcohol suppress the nervous system, causing a loss of cognitive functions, loss of motor functions, and loss of control. It is quite surprising that despite these serious physiological effects, mild intoxication is so very enjoyable. In my case it causes me to become less uptight, to worry less, to grin; and, at higher doses, to dance badly without inhibition. Indeed, nothing quite hits the spot like an intoxicating drink at the end of a long week at work.「Drink me,」a bottle of wine says,「and for a while the world won't be the same.」

A comparison of the chemical structure of methanol and ethanol—both are alcohols. Methanol has one carbon atom, while ethanol has two. Both are polar molecules containing a hydroxyl group—the OH at the end. Water is also polar, and this similarity allows both methanol and ethanol to mix well with it.

Alcohol is a general name for a family of hydrocarbon molecules similar to gasoline and diesel, but with an extra hydrogen atom and oxygen atom attached to them. Those extra atoms are called a hydroxyl group. Different kinds of alcohols come in different molecular sizes: the alcohol we drink has two carbon atoms and is called ethanol. It is a polar molecule, which means that there is a separation of a molecule's electric charge. In the case of alcohols, this is caused by the hydroxyl group. Water molecules also have a hydroxyl group and are also polar. This similarity is why ethanol dissolves in water. When the label on a bottle says what percentage of the drink is alcohol, it's telling you how much dissolved ethanol you're about to consume. In the case of the Chardonnay I was sipping, the answer was 13 percent.

Whereas one side of an alcohol molecule is similar to water, the other side, the hydrocarbon backbone, is similar to the structure of oils and the fatty molecules that coat the cells in your body. It is this similarity that allows ethanol to bypass the defenses of cell membranes and, being small, to sneak through the stomach's cell wall and enter your bloodstream directly. Approximately 20 percent of the ethanol you imbibe when you drink wine goes through your stomach wall and directly into your bloodstream, which is why you can feel the effects of alcohol almost immediately after drinking it.

This could explain my ludicrous remark to Susan, I thought, and quickly glanced her way to see if she seemed annoyed. Still wearing those red-rimmed glasses, she was engrossed in her novel. She had gray, close-cropped hair and wore a black T-shirt. Midfifties, I estimated her age to be. There were a few loose strands of hair, much longer than her own, on her T-shirt. Were they her lover's hair, I wondered, deposited there as they hugged goodbye at the airport? Or maybe they were from her dog.

Dogs also get drunk if they drink alcohol, which is why there is a growing market for non-alcoholic wine designed specifically for pets to consume at festive occasions. Non-alcoholic wine for human consumption is also available, although in my experience it bears very little resemblance to wine. What it does do, however, is highlight quite how much the regular wines rely on alcohol to balance the sweetness and fruitiness of the grape juice. It's what gives wine its air of sophistication and authority. Alcohol turns grape juice into an adult drink—a poison, admittedly, but one whose charms we willingly submit to.

I was already feeling a little intoxicated, but because I had not eaten anything for a while, I was about to become more so. Without food to slow down the progress of the alcohol through my stomach, it was now making its way to my small intestine. Here it entered my bloodstream and then encountered my liver. The liver's job is to get rid of the toxin, but it can metabolize ethanol at a rate of only about one glass of wine per hour (depending on your size). If you drink faster than this, ethanol will enter your bloodstream at a greater rate than it can be processed, and so will be able to infiltrate the rest of your organs, exerting its powers throughout your body. The effects of alcohol on the brain, for instance, are not uniform from person to person. They change, depending on how much you drink, your mental state, and other details of your physiology. But basically, alcohol depresses your nervous system, reduces inhibitions, and changes your mood.

Alcohol affects other organs too. It temporarily weakens the heart muscles, causing them to beat less vigorously and lowering your blood pressure. When blood circulates to your lungs to pick up oxygen from your breath, some of the alcohol jumps across the membranes along with the carbon dioxide being expelled from your blood. As you breathe out, the alcohol vapor becomes part of your exhale, which is why you can smell it when someone's been drinking. Testing for the presence of alcohol vapor in someone's breath is the principle behind the Breathalyzer, which the police use to test whether someone they suspect of drunk driving is, in fact, intoxicated.

While booze on the breath doesn't smell great, the other side of ethanol, the part that's more similar to oil than it is to water, gives us a considerably more fragrant liquid—perfume. Essential oils distilled from plants like bergamot and orange, or resins like myrrh, or animal-derived substances like musk, can all be dissolved in alcohol and turned into perfume. When you dab the perfume on your warm skin, the alcohol evaporates, leaving the oils to diffuse slowly into the air, shrouding you in the scent of your choosing. All the perfumes piled high in the departure lounges of airports are full of alcohol. If you were really desperate to get drunk, you could drink them; they'll have the same effect on you as vodka. But you have to be careful—some of the alcohols used in cheap perfumes contain methanol.

Methanol is the smallest alcohol molecule, with only one carbon atom, unlike ethanol, which has two. This small difference changes its pharmacological activity dramatically and makes methanol far more poisonous than ethanol. One shot glass of pure methanol can cause permanent blindness; three will kill you. This happens because once the methanol is in your body, your digestive system metabolizes it into formic acid and formaldehyde. Formic acid attacks nerve cells, especially the optic nerve. If you drink too much of it, the degradation of your optic nerve could leave you blind—this is where the expression「blind drunk」comes from. The formic acid also goes after your kidneys and liver, where it causes permanent damage that can be lethal.

Methanol is produced during the fermentation of alcoholic drinks, especially in the production of spirits like vodka and whiskey, but it's removed through the brewing process, so you're unlikely to encounter it in commercial spirits. If you make moonshine, hooch, poteen, or any other home-brewed spirits, though, you need to be very careful. These drinks are typically made by fermenting starch from crops such as corn, wheat, or potatoes. This results in a low-alcohol mixture called a mash, which is then connected to some pipework called a still, heated up, and distilled into a liquor with a high percentage of alcohol. The first liquid that emerges from the still is concentrated in methanol—you have to throw it away. Experienced home brewers know this, but people die every year after making moonshine for the first time.

Those in search of cheap alcohol sometimes resort to drinking alcohol-based liquids that are easy to buy, such as antifreeze, cleaning products, and perfumes. This is a very bad idea—not just because these liquids taste foul, but also because, since they are not designed to be drunk, the manufacturers don't always remove the methanol they contain. This can lead to tragic consequences. For instance, in December 2016, fifty-eight people died in Russia by drinking a scented bath oil. It wasn't the scented chemicals that killed them, but the methanol.

Here on the plane, though, the drinks trolley was coming past again, carrying alcoholic beverages that I was confident had little or no methanol content. When the flight attendant got to us, she asked if we would like any drinks to accompany our meal. Susan asked for white wine, while I opted for red.「I couldn't taste the vanilla in the white,」I said to her,「but see if you have any luck.」Susan smiled, poured her wine, raised her glass to me, but said nothing and returned to reading her book. She seemed pleased that I had started to chill out, and so was I. Alcohol is, of course, a relaxant and a social lubricant—a drug, yes, but a legally sanctioned one that provides more benefits to society than the problems it causes—or at least that's the story we tell ourselves. Getting intoxicated can make people more relaxed, or it can make them more antagonistic. In either case, they also become less able to make clear, rational decisions. Which makes you wonder why the dangers of intoxication are not mentioned in the preflight safety briefing: surely a drunk person is less safe in an emergency, and less able to make good decisions that affect others? But then, that assumes that the briefing is really about safety, which, as already mentioned, I don't believe it is.

While drinking wine may not increase your safety, it has other uses, one of which the attendant had alluded to: it is a traditional accompaniment to meals. Apart from being delicious in itself, it acts as a very effective palate cleanser, making the food itself more enjoyable. One of the key flavor components of wine is its astringency: the feeling of dry, parched roughness in the mouth. Pomegranate, pickles, and unripe fruit are all astringent foods. In wines, the astringency comes from tannins. These molecules, which originate in grape skins, break down the lubricating proteins in saliva and leave you with a dry mouth. But still, mild astringency in drinks is pleasurable, especially when you're drinking them with fatty foods. Fats lubricate the mouth, but although they can make a dish feel rich and luxurious, in excess they mask flavor and coat your mouth in clagginess and sickly oiliness. Astringency counteracts this fatty feeling, cleaning the mouth, removing any aftertaste from the food, and resetting your palate to neutral.

Studies show that palate-cleansing works best when an astringent drink is sipped in between bites of fatty foods; the pairing keeps the dry-mouth feeling associated with high tannins from building up, and does the same for the slippery feeling of fattiness. In other words, it makes sense to drink a red wine with steak, or a fatty fish such as salmon, no matter what anyone says about drinking red wines with fish. People think red wine will overwhelm the delicate taste of the fish, which is why they advise white. But in fact the flavor profiles of white wines (fruity, vanilla, and so on) overlap with those of red wines, and so the blanket rule is not helpful. Really, it's much more important to consider a wine's acidity and sweetness as you choose one to accompany your meal. Acidity is a measure of the sourness of the drink, while sweetness is a measure of a wine's dryness in the mouth. Some people, for instance, prefer wines that balance the bitterness of food, so they'd want to pair their meal with a glass of something dry and acidic. For instance, a full-flavored white Rioja goes well with glazed ham, while red Pinot Noir works very well with a Mediterranean fish stew.

In many cultures, food isn't paired with wine, but with spirits like vodka. Spirits are very effective palate cleansers because they contain a high percentage of ethanol, often 40 percent, which provides astringency. The alcohol also dissolves oils and fats in the mouth, along with their associated tastes. The advantage of drinking pure spirits with food is that they have very little flavor and so will not clash with a strongly flavored dish such as pickled herring.

The reason pure vodkas have so little flavor is because they have very little smell. Although the basic tastes of salty, sweet, sour, umami, and bitter are detected by taste buds in your mouth, the complex flavor profiles of food and drinks are detected by the thousands of olfactory receptors in your nose. Hence the importance of the bouquet of wine—this is why wine enthusiasts always sniff before drinking; most of the flavor you taste really comes from the wine's scent. It is also why wineglasses are designed with a large bowl. This is a vessel designed to hold the bouquet of the wine for your delight and appreciation.

When you eat, the release of smells inside your mouth accounts for most of the food's flavor, which is why, when you have a cold and mucus is covering your smell receptors, you can't taste the subtleties of whatever dish you're consuming. It also explains why wine tastes different at different temperatures: when it's served cold, only the very volatile substances evaporate in your mouth, and so you experience the flavor profile dominated by those; but when you warm the wine up, the smell is different. The extra energy allows more of the flavor molecules in the liquid to evaporate. This changes the aroma of the wine and so its taste. One of the main reasons why red and white wines are perceived to taste so very different from each other is that they are served at different temperatures. Cool down both a red wine and white wine, and then drink them in a blind taste test, and you'll see what I mean. At cooler temperatures many of fruitier flavor molecules stay in the liquid rather than contributing to the bouquet. This changes the balance of the flavor, so that acidity and dryness are empha sized, and for many this imparts a sense of crispness and clarity. When combined with the cooling effect on the palate, this can be an extremely delightful experience—a classic white-wine moment. Serve the same wine at room temperature and it tastes completely different. Now the acidity is muted by a fruity, passionate embrace that's not crisp but rather warm. There is no right and wrong here—it is just a matter of what you enjoy.

The red wine I was drinking on the plane was probably at about 70ºF; poured from a small bottle into my glass, the liquid had had time to warm to the ambient temperature of the aircraft.

Red wine in a glass, showing the Marangoni effect.

I swirled the wine around in the glass to gauge its alcohol content. I was looking for the Marangoni effect—when the wine forms tears as it flows down the glass. The ethanol in wine has the effect of lowering its surface tension with the glass, so when it's poured, it leaves a thin film. The alcohol in that coating quickly evaporates, leaving an area of liquid with a low concentration of alcohol, and thus a higher surface tension than the neighboring area. The unequal tensions pull the liquid apart, leaving a tear. The higher the alcohol concentration of the wine, the more pronounced this effect, so by looking at the Marangoni effect, you can get a sense of how alcoholic your wine is. My red had pronounced tears and so I estimated it to be a strong wine, with a high alcohol content of perhaps 14 percent, despite what the label said.

About that label. I closed my eyes and took a big glug without looking at the label to read the description. What could I taste? I found it had a strong, fruity, kind of, well, red-wine flavor. It wasn't bitter, but it wasn't sweet; it seemed fair to call it balanced. I wanted to say that it was smooth, but what did I mean by that? Clearly it was a liquid and therefore smooth by default. I guess I meant that it wasn't making my mouth feel dry or prickly—not astringent, then. I liked it, I thought, and allowed myself to peer at the label to see what it was meant to taste like.

「Deep violet, bags of blackcurrant and cherries, hints of bark; full of young tannins but still balanced, light body, fruity finish.」

Ah ha! I thought, having a quick look at Susan to see if she was reading her book. Which she was. She looked up quizzically, and I realized I'd spoken out loud. This made me realize I was a getting a little drunk, but not so drunk that I wasn't capable of realizing it, which was good.

The taste of wine owes more to its appearance (especially the label) and its cultural associations than many wine experts would like to admit. Studies show that flavor is constructed in the brain, which takes inputs not just from the taste buds in the mouth and the sensors in the nose, but also from your brain's expectation of what things should taste like. For instance, if you take strawberry ice cream and use a flavorless dye to change its color, making it, say, green, yellow, or orange, then people who taste the ice cream will have difficulty detecting the strawberry flavor. More likely than not, they'll taste flavors related to the color. If the ice cream is orange, they're likely to taste peach; if it's yellow, vanilla; and often green will taste like lime. What's perhaps most extraordinary about this, though, is that when I tried it myself, even when I knew the orange-colored ice cream I was eating was strawberry, I still seemed to taste peach. Clearly, flavor is a multisensory experience, and as the brain constructs the taste of a food or drink using sensory inputs from multiple sources, sight is so dominant that it often overrides other sensory input.

There are many theories as to why flavor is so influenced by vision. One of the primary ones has to do with how our brain interprets fragrance. Flavor is constructed from smell, and our detection of smells is approximately ten times slower than our visual detection. We have great difficulty identifying odors from specific molecules. This might be because single odors are recognized by multiple receptors in the nose. Even experts trained to detect particular molecular substances through smell fail to do so when these are mixed with four or five other smells. When you consider that wine has thousands of individual flavor molecules, the staggering challenge of wine tasting becomes evident. That our sense of smell doesn't provide enough information to reliably distinguish between mixtures of odors is evident if you play a simple game. Blindfold your fellow dinner guests one evening, and ask them to identify the liquids in a series of glasses that you pass to them (try orange juice, milk, cold coffee). The rules of the game are that they may only smell the substances, not taste or see them. Some drinks are easy, but most are difficult for your senses to detect correctly. After this, do not reveal the answers, but instead allow your guests to take off their blindfolds and now use smell and sight to identify the substances. This is much easier, now that you can bring to bear your experience of seeing and smelling that particular drink in the past. The game illustrates just how much we rely on vision to identify smell, and thus taste.

The importance of vision in appreciating wine was demonstrated most dramatically in a scientific study carried out in 2001 in France. A panel of fifty-four tasters were asked to judge the bouquet of two wines and comment on them. Both were Bordeaux wines; one was a white, made from Semillon and Sauvignon grapes, and the other was red, made from Cabernet Sauvignon and Merlot grapes. But the participants didn't know that a flavorless red dye had been added to the white. So far as the participants could tell, they were smelling two glasses of red. The color completely dominated their appreciation of the bouquet of the wines. Participants described both wines using words like「spicy,「intense,」and「blackcurrant,」even though one was a white wine with a flavor profile that did not match these descriptors.

But no matter how we manipulate the color of our drink, when the flavor we taste matches what we expected based on the drink's appearance, we tend to enjoy it more. Similarly, the bottle from which it is poured, the cleanliness and ambience of the space we're in, the attractiveness of the person serving us, and—especially in the case of wine—the association of sophistication and quality all change our drinking experience. Experiments have shown that we'll like wine more or less depending on where the label says it was produced, and that we'll enjoy it more if we hear something good about it before drinking—that it's won an award, for instance. Rather a lot of wines win awards, by the way; in many competitions, the vast majority of wines entered by the producers win a commendation.

If you're one of those people who think they don't know anything about wine, and you feel bewildered when you're handed a wine list in a restaurant, think about the unfamiliar names of the grapes, the countries of origin, and the dates of production as you would specifications of a car. You may or may not care whether your car has a gas or a diesel engine, or whether it has a 1.4-liter engine or 2.0-liter engine. These details may not be something you want to learn about. You may just want a car to get you from A to B reliably, and that's really all that matters to you. Most midpriced wines will do this beautifully, the A to B in the case of wines being a pleasant accompaniment to food, or a vehicle to let alcohol shift your mood, or a way to celebrate a birthday.

But perhaps you're someone who likes a car to do more than take you from A to B. Maybe you enjoy the sensation of getting there, screaming fast around corners, for instance, or, alternatively, having a smooth, floaty ride. Some wines are a vehicle for spikier flavors than others, while some, such as「natural」wines, really push the boundaries of what you expect a wine to taste like. These are not better wines; they are different wines, because all taste is subjective, and as with cars (and most of life), price is no reliable guide to these experiences. When you enjoy a wine, just like a ride in a car, you are enjoying a multisensory experience. Equally, if you buy an expensive brand of car, that's really what you're paying for—the brand, not the experience. Some people love having the most expensive cars; they get real enjoyment out of what that says about them as a person. It's the same with wines. But this doesn't mean that these are better wines or better cars, or even that the owners are more sophisticated people. Thus, if having the most expensive wine doesn't turn you on, then you're wasting your money on $75 bottles of wine. Most midpriced wines and many budget-priced wines have flavor profiles that are just as complex as those of top-priced wines—and blind testing shows this.

Meanwhile, on the plane I had finished yet another glass of wine and felt a headache coming on. It couldn't be a hangover already, could it? Or was I just dehydrated? One of the physiological effects of alcohol on the body is to inhibit the secretion of hormones that tell your kidneys to conserve water. If you don't drink water to compensate, you become dehydrated. The cabin crew were nowhere to be seen, so I dug out the expensive bottle of water I'd bought in departures. The bottle hissed open and I took a greedy glug. That felt good. Looking out the window, I could see a much bigger body of liquid water below—the beautiful blue ocean, stretching all the way out to the horizon.

3 / Deep

THE WATER IN MY plastic bottle was quite different from the water in the ocean I could see through my oval airplane window. The differences weren't just in composition—their respective salt contents and so on—but also in behavior. Earth's oceans are in a constant state of flux: they both create winds and are driven by them; they make the clouds and our weather systems, and are driven by them; they heat up the atmosphere, but also store heat. Huge global currents are established inside the oceans, and these affect our climate. Thus, despite being made of roughly the same molecules, the oceans that cover 70 percent of our planet are not just giant versions of the water in a bottle. They are utterly different beasts.

And beast is probably the right word to describe them. The oceans are dangerous, no matter how competent a swimmer you might be; keeping afloat in the open ocean is extremely difficult for more than a few hours at a time. My advice, if you do find yourself stranded at sea, is not to exhaust yourself trying to battle the currents; instead, float on your back while you await rescue. Though, in my opinion, floating is really the wrong word to describe what happens when humans bob about in the water. Floating is what boats do. They are majestic; they cruise along with just a small portion of their bulk submerged. Whenever I try to「float,」most of my body sinks; if I'm lucky, I can just about keep my nose poking out of the water while I snort like a whale, breathing in air while simultaneously trying, and usually failing, to keep water from getting up my nose. Real floating, in my view, entails not just resting on top of water, but doing so with ease. But that's not the standard definition, and it's certainly not what Archimedes meant when he discovered the principle of floating two thousand years ago, and famously shouted「Eureka!」in his bathtub.

Archimedes was a Greek mathematician and engineer. He noticed that when you get into a bath, the water level goes up. The reason is obvious enough; you're sitting where some of the water used to be. It doesn't get compressed underneath you like a foam mattress would; instead, because it is a liquid, it flows around you and finds somewhere else to go. In the contained space of a tub, the only place for it to go is above the initial water level. If the bath is already full when you get in, then the water will flow over the edge of the tub and onto the floor. This is where Archimedes' famous experiment comes in. By collecting the water that spills over the edge in another vessel, it tells you something interesting: the weight of that water equals the so-called buoyancy force acting on you. If that force is lower than your weight, you will sink; otherwise you will float. This applies to any object. Eureka!

Why some things float and others sink comes down to whether they weigh more than their equivalent volume of water.

What Archimedes had discovered is that you can predict whether something will float or sink by simply working out the weight of water it will displace. For solid stuff you just have to compare the density of the material to the density of water. Thus wood, which weighs less per volume than water, is less dense than water, and so it floats. Steel is denser than water, so it sinks. But there is a trick: you can still make ships of steel if you make them hollow. Then their average density can be less than that of water, and so they float. It's as simple as that. Fast-forward two thousand years from Archimedes' heyday, and we find that the price of steel is now low enough for us to actually be able to build ships this way; our current maritime shipping fleet, which carries 90 percent of the world's traded goods, is made up almost entirely of steel ships.

The human body is composed of materials of varying density: there are dense bones and less dense tissue, and in some places we are hollow. Overall we're a bit less dense than water, which is why we can float. But if you adjust your density to exactly match the water's, by wearing something heavy—a metal belt, for instance—you'll be in a state of neither sinking nor floating; you're neutrally buoyant, the ideal state for scuba diving. When you're neutrally buoyant underwater, there's no net force trying to make you float to the surface, nor is there a force making you sink to the bottom of the ocean. In your scuba gear, you're effectively weightless, free to explore the coral reefs and sunken wrecks of the deep. It's so close to the feeling of weightlessness found in space that astronauts train in swimming pools.

Without the aid of scuba equipment, the human body floats. But our body is only slightly less dense than water, so more than 90 percent of it needs to be submerged in order to displace enough water to support our weight. Fatter people are more buoyant than thinner people because their fat-to-bone ratio makes them less dense. Wetsuits also make you more buoyant—they're coating you in a significant layer of material that is less dense than water. It's a little bit easier to float in the sea than it is in a swimming pool because the sea has minerals dissolved in it, such as salt, or so dium chloride. The sodium and the chlorine get inside the liquid by splitting up and inserting themselves between the water molecules. Having these atoms inside it makes the water more dense, so you don't need to displace quite so much water to counter your weight as you would in pure water. In fact, the Dead Sea in the Middle East has so much salt in it (ten times as much as the Atlantic Ocean) that you can bob around like a duck right on top of it.

A man floating on the Dead Sea.

Once you can float, you can swim: one of life's greatest pleasures. In water, not only are you weightless, but you can glide like a dancer. There's a hidden world lying just under the surface. Forget the expense of going to Mars and the excitement of searching for life on other planets—the oceans are, in all practical respects, alien worlds for us. By donning a pair of goggles and ducking underwater with a quick kick of the legs, we can visit them. Gliding down to the turquoise depths of a coral reef is one of the most wondrous things you can ever do. The fish observe you with weary eyes and flick their tails to swerve expertly out of your way. When you swim, you reach forward with one arm outstretched; by pulling it back, you cause the liquid around you to move rapidly enough to prevent the water molecules from moving past one another, so they jam together, exerting a force on you. It's that force that propels you forward in the opposite direction. This is the essence of swimming—your arms and your legs are constantly moving the water behind you, which has the effect of pushing you forward. It's not just thrilling; you essentially become a different person. Whereas on land you might be clumsy and plodding, in the water you can whirl and glide like a dolphin: you're free.

I used to live in a neighborhood in Dublin called Dun Laoghaire, within walking distance of a swimming spot called the Forty Foot, a rocky promontory in Dublin Bay famous for being featured in James Joyce's Ulysses, and home for centuries to a swimming club. I stopped by on a winter's day in 1999, and I saw people of all ages, but mostly senior citizens, jumping into the sea for a swim. The air temperature was perhaps 54ºF, and the sea was about 50ºF. I was wearing a big overcoat, and still I felt a bit cold as the winds from the Irish Sea buffeted me and the waves jumped up at the concrete quayside. Yet here were the elderly, who might be advised by their doctors to wrap up warm, jumping into the freezing waters. I got talking to a few of them as they dried themselves off afterward. They were happy and smiling and delighted. Their teeth chattered with the cold, but they were clearly elated. They told me that they swam every day of the year, in cold weather just as in warm—although, as I discovered in my time working there, Ireland rarely gets truly warm.

The author after swimming at the Forty Foot in Dublin.

I decided to join them and bought a swimming cap that very same day. I swam in the Forty Foot every week of the year from then on. Looking back, it's one of the things I miss most about living in Dublin. But why did I love it so much?

Diving into water that is 50ºF is not a comforting feeling. It is more like a slap in the face. It's not that the temperature is so extremely cold, but that you're surrounding your skin in water that's a good forty degrees colder than your skin. The water molecules draw heat away. But since liquids are denser than gases, there are many more molecules interacting with your skin per second than when you're just exposed to the air, so the heat conduction away from your warm skin is that much more extreme.

What makes it feel worse is another characteristic of water, called heat capacity. When water molecules are exposed to something hot, they jig about faster. These vibrations are what we call temperature. So the faster they go, the hotter the water gets. The hydrogen bonds holding the water molecules together strongly resist this vibration, so it takes a lot of heat to increase the average temperature of a quart of water molecules by even just one degree. To put this in perspective, it takes ten times more energy to heat up water than it does to heat up the same weight of copper. This feature of water, its exceptional heat capacity, explains why it takes so much heat to make a cup of tea. It also explains why an electric kettle is typically the most energy-intensive gadget in the kitchen. But that's just one of many ways in which water's high heat capacity—the highest of any liquid except ammonia—affects us. It's also what allows the oceans to store a lot of heat, and so their temperature always lags behind that of the air. Hence, on a sunny day in Dublin, the air temperature might heat up to 72ºF, while the sea temperature will hardly change from 50ºF. Sadly, for Irish people, this means that the sea never really warms up from the summer sun before winter comes again to cool it down. But it is a major advantage for us as a species because the high heat capacity of the oceans allows them to absorb a lot of the excess heat brought about by climate change. In other words, the oceans are stabilizing our climate, keeping us warm in the winter and cooling us down in the summer.

But none of that really explains why I enjoy swimming in the cold sea. I'm not one of those hardy outdoor types who relish being cold and wet. I'm a scientist and engineer, and I spend most of my time inside a laboratory or a workshop. Maybe that's the point—the sea is so marvelously wild and unpredictable that perhaps, unconsciously, I just want to expose myself to something utterly different from my day-to-day life. When you dive into the cold sea, you have to swim, to be alive and alert; it is so uncomfortable that it forces you out of a conscious rational mindset. It's impossible to worry about your failed experiments, unsubstantiated theories, or even your bungled relationships when you're gasping for breath—the very breath that is knocked out of you because you chose to dive into forbidding, uncontrollable waters.

Hypothermia is always at the back of your mind when you're swimming in cold water. Hypothermia sets in when your core temperature drops below 95ºF. You start shivering uncontrollably and your skin changes color as your surface blood vessels contract, diverting blood toward your major organs. First you go pale, then your extremities turn blue. In very cold waters, the shock can cause uncontrolled rapid breathing, gasping, and a massive increase in heart rate that can lead to panic, confusion, and drowning. But even if you remain calm, swimming in 32ºF water for just fifteen minutes will be fatal, as hypothermia sets in and shuts down your muscles.

Ultimately, I think it was that cold hand of death that drew me to the Forty Foot on all those icy gray January mornings, when the water temperature was, on average, 50ºF. It made me feel more alive to be that close to death, to tease it, and then get out of the water and walk away unscathed.

Well, mostly unscathed. One day things didn't go so well for me. I arrived at the Forty Foot on a Saturday in February and found it deserted. The usual cadre of senior citizens was not in evidence. The tide was high and the water was choppy, with the occasional big wave coming in and launching itself onto the quay where I was changing into my swimming trunks. I was shivering, and my skin was covered in goose pimples from the cold winds. I was ready to jump, but hesitated before looking out at the water. I had never swum here alone before and the sea was rougher than I'd yet experienced. Maybe, I thought, this is why no one else is swimming today? Seconds of doubt elapsed. I remember goading myself, thinking, Am I really so scared that, after going to the trouble of changing into my swimming trunks, I'm not even going to swim? I dived in.

I felt the usual slap in the face, the sense that my body was under attack, that the ocean was sucking the life out of me. I always dealt with this by swimming energetically, so off I went, out to sea, fighting the waves coming toward me and trying to ignore the intense cold seeping into my limbs. I made it out a fair way before stopping to take a breather and getting hit smack in the face by a wave. I swallowed a mouthful of water, coughed, spluttered, and then took a deep breath, only to be hit in the face again. This time I choked. Water had gone down my windpipe, and I started thrashing out in an attempt to rise far enough out of the water to breathe properly, even if for just a couple of seconds. I couldn't do it, though; the water was too rough and the waves kept beating me down. I panicked, and began hyperventilating, while desperately kicking my legs to keep myself from drowning. Then another big wave hit me, and my panic turned to exhaustion. I couldn't win; I was cold and dead tired.

That's when I hit the rocks. While I'd been choking—for how long, I do not know—the waves and the tide had been pushing me toward the rocks that buttressed the Forty Foot and protected it from winter storms. These rocks, each the size of a small car, had been dropped into place by a crane to form a harbor barrier. Being washed up against rocks like that is normally something to avoid. It's nearly impossible to control the speed at which you'll hit them—that's almost entirely determined by the size, height, and speed of the waves carrying you—so it can be incredibly dangerous. But still, at that moment, I was relieved; hitting the rocks left me with a fair number of cuts and bruises, but it also gave me a chance to escape. Not that it was easy—as the waves that smashed me into the rocks receded, they pulled me away from the shore too. It took three or four waves and a good deal of scrapping, scratching, and bleeding for me to get a hold firm enough to allow me to climb up and finally escape from the sea.

I have relived this episode of my life many times, more often than not when I'm gazing out at the extreme implacable beauty of the ocean. But up here in the airplane, from my vantage point at forty thousand feet, the helplessness I'd felt at the time was magnified. I knew I could have drowned that day if I had swallowed one more wave, or if the tide had taken me out to sea rather than into the rocks. Many people die in similar circumstances. I knew I had been stupid. The ocean's ability to swallow you up without a trace is laid frighteningly bare when you look out at its harsh, seemingly endless expanse from the stratosphere. I turned to Susan, to see if she might be up for some sort of chat about oceans, waves, and ac cidental drowning, but she was wrapped up in a blanket with her knees pressed to her chest, watching some sort of sci-fi movie. The screen showed a picture of a spaceship moving into orbit around an enormous planet.

Size matters when it comes to bodies of water. When wind blows over a small pond, this creates friction, which slows the wind down and pushes against the water. This causes a depression in the water's surface. The surface tension of the water resists this change much as a rubber band resists being extended. Once that puff of wind ceases, just as with a rubber band, the release of tension, along with the force of gravity, restores the surface to its original form. As that water descends, a ripple is generated that radiates outward, as each water molecule displaces another, which, in turn, displaces still another, and so on. A ripple in water is really a pulse of energy. Energy, having originated from the wind, is now stuck on the surface of the pond. It makes the surface of the pond rougher, and so increases the resistance to the wind flowing over its surface. Thus, the ripple is joined by others, and they're pushed higher and higher. The higher the ripples, the greater the restoring force pulling them back down again, and so the rougher the pond becomes. There is a limit, though, to how high these ripples can go; eventually they'll hit the edge of the pond, and most of their energy will be absorbed by the land. But the longer they travel, the higher they'll get, which is why in a small pond ripples are never very big, but in a lake they can become so big that the wind will turn them into waves.

The top of a wave is called its peak and the bottom is called the trough. The distance between them is what we refer to when we talk about the size of a wave. As long as the size of the wave is smaller than the depth of the lake it's in, then the wave will travel uninhibitedly. But as the wave approaches the shallower waters at the shore, the trough will start to interact with the bottom of the lake, causing a kind of friction that will slow the wave down and force it to break, leaving it lapping on the beach.

In an ocean thousands of miles wide, those initial ripples have the time and space to grow to several feet in height. Wind blowing over the surface of the ocean for two hours at twelve miles per hour can make waves 12 inches high. A wind blowing at thirty miles per hour for a whole day can make waves 13 feet high. And a storm wind blowing for three or four days at forty-seven miles per hour can make 26-foot-high waves. The largest wave of this sort, recorded during a typhoon off the seas of Taiwan in 2007, reached 105 feet in height.

The waves produced during storms don't stop when the storm abates. Like ripples in a pond, they travel across the ocean, which is when their length becomes important. The length of a wave is the distance from its peak to the peak of the next wave. In a stormy ocean, it's hard to determine length because all the waves are jumbled on top of one another; a rough sea looks like a moving morass of angry water. When the storm ends, though, the waves carry on their way, and because they all have different lengths, they also have different speeds. So, as the waves travel across hundreds of miles of ocean, they separate out into sets, based on which ones are moving at similar speeds. Within the sets, the waves align, so that they run parallel. Eventually, each set will arrive at the coast in an ordered and regular pattern. Thus, the crash of waves onto the beach is essentially the sound of a storm that's come from very far away. That beautiful hypnotic rhythm comes from the complexities of ocean dynamics.

Given that storm waves are generated all over the ocean, it is a bit surprising that they usually approach land perpendicular to the beach. Surely, you might think, they should approach land at an angle determined by the straight line between the beach and whichever place in the ocean the waves were generated. But no, waves are too tricky for that. As a wave travels across deep water, its speed remains constant, because there's almost nothing that can slow it down. But as it approaches land, the water gets shallower, and the trough starts to interact with the seabed, slowing down that part of the wave. Meanwhile, the parts of the wave that have not yet encountered shallow water carry on at the same speed. The difference in speeds turns the wave in the same way that braking on one wheel of a car changes its direction. The net result: as waves approach land, they turn so that they are parallel to the contours of the seabed, which tend to run perpendicular to the beach, and thus most waves approach the shore from the same direction.

Surfers all know this. They also know about shoaling, which is what makes surfing such an exciting sport. Imagine you're sitting on your surfboard, looking out to sea; what you really want to know is where and when the waves are going to break. As the waves come closer to shore, they slow down because they encounter shallow water, but that also increases their height. This is shoaling. The shallower the water gets, the higher the wave gets, until the steepness of the wave reaches a critical angle where it becomes unstable. It's become so steep, you can slide down it on a surfboard, as if you were skiing down a mountain slope.

Surfing requires balance, timing, and an understanding of how waves behave. If you want to surf along a wave, you need part of the wave to start breaking before the rest. This means you need the contours of the seabed to slope gradually along the beach, because the moment a wave breaks is determined by the depth of the water it's moving through. You also need to understand the tides, which change the depth of the water throughout the day, based on the gravitational pull of the moon and the sun.

In sum, to catch a wave, you need a storm out at sea to produce waves big enough to travel across the ocean, toward a beach with an appropriately shaped seabed. You need them to arrive at just the right time of day to align with the tide. Then, if you're there at exactly that moment, wetsuit on, surfboard in hand, and ready, you might catch a sweet wave to shore. The exquisite timing of this confluence of events is what makes surfing such a special sport—it requires surfers to be completely in tune with the storms out at sea, the sun, the moon, and the water they're riding.

Even if you're not a wave connoisseur, it's still worth knowing about shoaling because it could save your life. On the morning of December 26, 2004, tourists on Phuket Island in Thailand were walking on the beach when they noticed something odd. The sea was receding fast, exposing usually submerged rocks and leaving boats stranded in the bay. Children watched and wondered, and so did their parents, as a large wave suddenly appeared; they thought they'd never seen anything like it before. But of course, they had: this was the shoaling of a wave. Only this wave was enormous: a tsunami.

As it turns out, just a few hours earlier, in the middle of the Indian Ocean, part of Earth's crust had ruptured, causing an earthquake of magnitude 9.0. This is a massive earthquake by any standards. The energy released was estimated to be ten thousand times bigger than that of the atomic bomb dropped on Hiroshima. Nevertheless, being that far out to sea, it didn't cause much immediate damage or loss of life. But the earthquake didn't just shear the tectonic plates of the crust—it also raised the seafloor by several feet. This, in turn, displaced approximately seven cubic miles of water. That's a lot of water—the equivalent of ten million Olympic swimming pools. And just as moving suddenly in the bath makes the water slosh back and forth, the earthquake set this enormous amount of water into motion.

Waves being waves, they set off across the ocean in all directions. If you'd been looking down from an aircraft at the moment the tsunami began, you probably wouldn't have been too worried. The waves were spread over such a large distance, and in such deep water, that only a small hump would have been discernible. But you might still have been alarmed by the speed at which they were traveling. Because of the intensity of the earthquake, and the vast amount of energy released over a short period of time, those waves traveled at the speed of a jet aircraft, about five hundred miles per hour. As they approached the coast and the shallow water of the Andaman Sea, they slowed down and got taller. The closer they got, the more the shoaling intensified. Because the waves were hundreds of feet long, the first thing the people on the beach noticed was the water being sucked out to sea. If they had recognized the phenomenon, they would have had about a minute to run to higher ground. But, tragically, most of them didn't know what was happening—unlike many of the animals near the beach, which seemed to sense that something strange was going on, and fled. Those who stayed were hit by the first wave, which was thirty feet high when it reached the shore.

The arrival of a tsunami wave.

All in all, the tsunami killed 227,898 people along the coastlines of fifteen countries. What makes a tsunami so dangerous is not just the vast amount of water it dumps on the coast, but the force that the water exerts on everything it meets. One gallon of water weighs 8.3 pounds, and the tsunami displaced eight trillion gallons of water. It ripped apart huts, trees, and cars, destroying them and thus creating a river of debris that smashed into everything it encountered. It swept up tankers, houses, and cars and flung them into bridges and overhead electricity pylons, which collapsed, creating lethal fires. The people who were pulled into the wave were carried along, bashed, tumbled, and crushed by all this fast-flowing debris. This knocked many of them unconscious or injured them in a way that hindered their ability to stay afloat. Just like storm waves, tsunamis come in sets, and as the first wave was pulled back (having reached more than a mile inland in places) by the approach of the second, the currents reversed and pulled the people and debris caught in their path into this new onslaught.

Unfortunately, those who were lucky enough to survive this devastation faced any number of challenges in its aftermath, water pollution being one of the most severe. The freshwater supplies in the areas hit by the tsunami had been poisoned by the destruction of sewers and the infiltration of saltwater; the hundreds of thousands of people struck dead by the waves all had to be buried as quickly as possible to prevent the spread of disease and pests; and longer-term infiltration of saltwater into the region's arable land left it unable to support crops.

But as catastrophic as the 2004 tsunami was, the one in 2011 off the coast of Japan was even more powerful. The tsunami was created by the force of an enormous earthquake—the fourth most powerful in recorded history—with an epicenter in the ocean, forty-three miles off the shore of Honshu, the largest island in the Japanese archipelago. Shaking was felt on land for six minutes, but the worst damage didn't occur until later, when the resulting tsunami hit the shore, devastating entire towns and colliding with the Fukushima Daiichi Nuclear Power Plant.

Fukushima Daiichi was built in 1971 and had six nuclear fission reactors. These reactors are made up of rods of uranium oxide, which are bundled together inside the reactor core. A reactor emits radiation in the form of very high energy particles. In a nuclear power plant, most of this energy goes toward heating up water to create steam, which drives turbines, which in turn cre ate electricity. This type of nuclear energy is so powerful that a set of rods of uranium oxide the size of a small car will produce the amount of electricity needed to run a city of a million people for two years. Prior to the 2011 tsunami, the Fukushima plant had six of these reactors, all producing power twenty-four hours a day, 365 days a year, for approximately five million people.

Japan has a long history of earthquakes; it lies at the boundary between two major tectonic plates. The Fukushima plant was built to withstand these earthquakes, and indeed it did. As did Japan's other fifty-four nuclear reactors. When the earthquake occurred, on March 11, 2011, it didn't damage the plant at all. However, due to legally mandated safety precautions, three of the reactors (1, 2, and 3) all shut themselves down (reactors 4, 5, and 6 were already shut down for refueling). You can't just turn nuclear fuel「off.」It still gives out heat and radioactivity when the reactors are shut down. They need active cooling to prevent a meltdown of the uranium oxide. During shutdown, this is provided by diesel-fueled backup generators, which produce electricity to power the pumps that circulate the cooling water.

Ultimately, thirteen thousand people would die as a result of the 2011 earthquake; but when the shaking stopped, and the reactors shut down, 90 percent of them were still alive. Then, fifty minutes later, a forty-three-foot tsunami wave, traveling at an average speed of 310 miles per hour, hit the power station. The water destroyed the plant's seawall defenses and flooded the buildings containing the diesel generators that were cooling the nuclear fuel rods. The generators failed, and a second backup system kicked in, powered by a set of electrical batteries. The batteries had the capacity to run the plant's cooling systems for twenty-four hours. Under normal circumstances, this would have been enough time either to restore the diesel generators or to obtain more batteries. However, the tsunami, the biggest to hit Japan in modern times, destroyed anything and everything in its path. The sheer force of the water pulverized whole towns, forty-five thousand buildings, and almost a quarter of a million vehicles, and left the regions' roads and bridges in a mess. The areas where the tsunami hit came to a standstill, making it incredibly difficult to get medical help to the survivors and impossible to rush the backup batteries to the Fukushima plant in time to replace the ones running the cooling systems. Twenty-four hours after the tsunami hit, the batteries died and the temperature inside the reactors started to rise.

When nuclear fuel rods melt, they look a lot like lava, but the liquid is much hotter. Lava comes out of a volcano red-hot, typically at 1,800ºF. Liquid uranium-oxide nuclear fuel is much more fearsome, a white-hot liquid with a temperature exceeding 5,000ºF. It will melt and dissolve pretty much anything it comes in contact with. At Fukushima, it melted its way through the ten inches of steel that had been containing it, and then continued to eat through the concrete floor of at least one of the reactors. But that was just the beginning.

The nuclear fuel in the reactor is encased in an alloy made from zirconium. It is incredibly resistant to corrosion, except at high temperatures. At 5,000ºF, the zirconium alloys react strongly with water, producing hydrogen gas. It's estimated that as a result of the meltdown, one ton of hydrogen gas was produced in each of the plant's reactors. On March 12, the hydrogen gas reacted with the air inside the reactor containment building, creating an explosion that destroyed the complex.

Liquids are incredibly hard to contain, and as a result a great deal of the radioactive contamination from these nuclear meltdowns made its way into the area's water systems, and ultimately the sea. From there it can and does go anywhere and everywhere. This is why the primary concern of all nuclear-waste engineers is preventing water ingress into any of their storage facilities. Yet most nuclear power stations are built near large bodies of water, not because it's safer, but because it's cheaper. They need the water for cooling: having a large supply readily available makes the plant much more energy- and cost-efficient. But as we saw in Fu kushima, when disaster strikes, our water supply is vulnerable to a huge amount of radioactive waste.

This isn't just a nuclear issue. Almost all of the world's major cities are coastal because, historically, trade between countries required ports. But with sea levels rising as a result of global climate change, the impact of tsunamis and hurricanes and storms is going to make these places—and their dense populations—ever more vulnerable. The only way to protect ourselves from this threat is to get to higher ground, or perhaps into the air. A tempting thought, from my perch on the plane, where I was currently sipping water and looking down omnipotently at the vast Atlantic. It was a calm, clear day, and the ocean, I felt, looked almost innocent.

But then there was a bump, and the whole aircraft seemed to drop for a second before recovering. Then it happened again, so violently that water shot out of the top of my bottle and soaked my lap.

「We are currently flying through a patch of turbulence,」the captain announced over the intercom.「I'm turning on the FASTEN SEAT BELT sign, and ask that all passengers please return to their seats. We will resume the in-flight service in a few minutes when we reach smoother air.」The plane dropped vertiginously again. My stomach felt queasy, and out the window I caught a glimpse of the wings oscillating wildly.

