13 / Sustainable

LIVING ON A FLUID planet, the one thing we can be certain about is change: sea levels are rising; Earth's mantle is flowing, moving the continents; volcanoes erupt, creating new lands and destroying others; hurricanes, typhoons, and tsunamis continue to a batter our coastlines, reducing cities to rubble. In the face of this future it seems only rational to build our homes, roads, water systems, power stations, and indeed airports—all the stuff we rely on to live a dignified and civilized life—to withstand damage. This stuff needs to be strong and tough to survive earthquakes and floods, yes, but it'd be even better if we could design our infrastructure so it would repair itself, allowing our cities to be more nimble and resilient in the face of environmental change. This may sound far-fetched, but in fact, it's what biological systems have been doing for millions of years. Consider a tree: if it's damaged in a storm, it can repair itself by growing new limbs. Likewise, if you cut yourself, your skin heals itself. Could our cities become similarly self-healing?

In 1927 Professor Thomas Parnell of the University of Queensland in Australia conducted an experiment to see what would happen to black tar if it was left to settle in a funnel. What he found was this: Over days, it behaved like a solid, staying just where he put it. But over months and years it started to creep and behave like a liquid. Indeed, it flowed down the funnel and started to form droplets. The first drop fell in 1938, the second fell in 1947, the third in 1954, and so on, with the ninth drop falling in 2014. This is surprising behavior from a material that seems so solid when you drive over it in your car. That's asphalt, but asphalt is just tar mixed with stones. So what's going on?

The University of Queensland Pitch Drop experiment (taken in 1990, two years after the seventh drop, and ten years before the eighth drop fell).

Tar is a much more interesting material than anyone initially thought—materials scientists included. Extracted from the ground or produced as a byproduct of crude oil, it seems to be nothing more than boring black sludge. But in reality, it's a dynamic mixture of hydrocarbon molecules that formed over millions of years from the decayed molecular machinery of bio logical organisms. The decay products are complex molecules, which, although not part of a living system anymore, nevertheless self-organize within the tar, creating a set of interlinked structures. At normal temperatures the smaller molecules inside the tar have enough energy to move through its internal architecture, which gives the material fluidity. So tar is a liquid, albeit a very viscous one: it is two billion times more viscous than peanut butter, which explains why Professor Parnell's tar has taken so long to drip through the funnel.

How the liquid flow inside asphalt roads allows cracks to heal themselves.

Tar's characteristic pungent smell comes from molecules that contain sulfur, an element often associated with smelly organic substances. When you walk or drive past engineers laying down a new road surface, you'll see and smell them heating up tar, which gives the molecules more energy to move, and thus to flow. But the extra energy also allows more of the molecules to evaporate into the air, and so the material becomes smellier, just as drinks become more aromatic when they are heated up.

A smelly liquid might seem an idiotic thing to build a road with, but engineers add stones to the material, creating a composite substance, part liquid and part solid—similar, in fact, to the structure of peanut butter, which is made of a lot of ground-up pieces of peanut all held together by an oil. The strength and hardness of the stones support the weight of vehicles driving over the asphalt and also helps the road resist damage from exposure. Cracks do sometimes open up if the forces exerted on the road get to be too high, but they do so between the stones and the tar that's gluing them together. This is where the liquid nature of tar comes to the rescue: the tar flows in and reseals these cracks, allowing the road to repair itself and last far longer than a purely solid surface ever would.

Of course, as road users, you'll have noticed that there is a limit to their self-repairing properties: roads eventually do get old and start to disintegrate. Temperature is partially to blame. If the temperature gets below, say, 68ºF, then the liquid tar becomes so viscous that it cannot reflow and heal the cracks as they appear. And beyond that, over time, oxygen from the air reacts with molecules on the surface of the tar and alters their properties, again making it more and more viscous, and less and less able to seal up cracks. Over time, the road skin will change color and become less fluid, just as your skin becomes less flexible and drier as you age. This is when you'll see small potholes form, which, unless tended to, grow and grow and eventually destroy the road surface entirely.

A case in point: my journey on the airport shuttle bus to the hotel. As soon as we arrived in the city, we got stuck in a traffic jam caused by lane closures due to road resurfacing. The shuttle crawled along as three lanes converged into one—by my estimation, we moved less than a mile in thirty minutes. It was 2 a.m. according to my body clock; I was tired and I desperately needed to pee.

It doesn't have to be this way. Or at least that's what we materials scientists hope. Scientists and engineers around the world are busily developing strategies for increasing the life of roads, and thus reducing traffic jams. In the Netherlands, a group of engineers is studying the effect of incorporating tiny microscopic fibers of steel into tar. This does not alter the mechanical properties of the road much, but it does make them more powerful. When the material is exposed to an alternating magnetic field, electric currents flow inside the steel fibers, heating them up. The hot steel, in turn, heats up the tar, making it locally more fluid, allowing it to flow and heal any cracks. Essentially, they're supercharging the self-healing properties of tar and also countering the challenges of winter's cold temperatures. The technology is now being tested on stretches of motorway in the Netherlands, using a special vehicle that applies a magnetic field to the road as it drives along. The idea is that, in the future, all vehicles could be fitted with such a device, so anyone driving on a road would also be revitalizing it.

Another way to address tar's natural loss of fluidity is to replenish its lost volatile ingredients—the molecules that make it flow. The easiest way of doing that would be to apply a special kind of cream to the road surface—essentially a moisturizing cream, just like the ones we use on our skin. A more sophisticated version of this method is being tested by a group in Nottingham University in the UK, led by Dr. Alvaro García. They put microcapsules of sunflower oil into tar. These remain intact inside the material until microcracks form, causing the capsules to rupture. The oil, once released, locally increases the fluidity of the tar and thus promotes flow and self-healing capabilities. The results of these studies show that cracked asphalt samples are restored to their full strength two days after the sunflower oil is released. This is a dramatic improvement. It is estimated that this has the potential to increase the lifespan of a road from twelve years to sixteen years with only a marginal increase in cost.

In our research group at the Institute of Making, we are working on technologies that can help repair asphalt efficiently once the cracks have already got bigger: we've started to do 3D printing of tar.

The 3D printing process. A print head converts a solid to a liquid (often by heating) and squirts it out in a predetermined pattern in an x–y plane. Once cooled, this creates a single solid layer. Then the printing platform is moved down and another layer in a different pattern is printed. Printing hundreds of layers this way creates a whole object.

3D printing is a relatively new way of making and repairing objects. Thousands of years ago, printing was invented in China as a process of transferring ink onto a page via a wooden printing block. The rest of the world caught on and innovated, giving us a world of books, newspapers, and magazines—an information revolution. But all that is 2D printing; 3D printing takes the approach one stage further. Instead of printing a thin, two-dimensional layer of liquid ink onto a page, 3D printing allows you to print many two-dimensional layers of liquid on top of one another, each one solidifying before the next is applied, ultimately constructing a 3D object.

Of course, you don't need to use ink to make a 3D print. You can use any material that can be transformed from a liquid into a solid. Just look at bees. This is exactly how they make their extraordinary hexagonal honeycombs. When they are between twelve and twenty days old, worker bees develop a special gland for converting honey into soft wax flakes. They chew up the wax and deposit it layer by layer to make the honeycomb. Wasps use the same trick to make their nests, chewing wood fibers and mixing them with saliva to create paper houses for their larvae.

Bees were using 3D printing to build their honeycombs long before humans happened upon the technique.

Human 3D printing technology is now catching up with the bees and wasps. Plastics, for instance, can be squirted out of a printer, layer by layer, to create solid objects more complex than honeycombs. Even objects with moving parts can be printed—this technique is being used in medicine to create prosthetics with functioning joints, all made in one piece, at low cost. Also, 3D printing can be used to print biological materials. In 2018 Chinese scientists conducted the first clinical trials to create replacement ears for children suffering from birth deformities. They did this using the children's own cell tissue and 3D printers to create the scaffold for the cells to grow into ears.

3D printing works for metals too. The Dutch company MX3D is using 3D printing to make steel bridges, adding molten steel, blob by blob, and relying on techniques borrowed from welding technology. Another technique for the 3D printing of metal objects is to use a high-powered laser that melts metal powders and joins them. This process is being used to make everything from gold jewelry to jet engine parts. One of the major advantages of this technique is that it's easy to make things hollow, which lowers weight and saves material. Objects are increasingly being designed to have arteries, allowing coolant, lubricant, or even fuel to flow through them. In essence, this design mimics our bodies—we are part solid flesh and part liquid. Our blood delivers nutrients via our circulatory and arterial systems, which also deliver proteins and other molecular ingredients to parts of our body that are hurt, allowing them to grow new cells to replace damaged ones in our skin, brain, liver, kidneys, heart, and so on. This is another aspect of nature we can now emulate, thanks to 3D printing, potentially allowing technology to last longer by repairing itself, and so be more sustainable.

The byproduct, of course, of the body's reliance on circulating fluids is that it creates waste, which also needs to be ejected. Getting rid of some liquid was the first thing on my mind when I got off the shuttle bus in front of my hotel in San Francisco: I still needed to pee badly. I hopped from foot to foot during check-in, and then sprinted to my allocated room, almost wetting myself as I spent frustrating moments swiping, and re-swiping, my pass card in the slot of the door, until I finally got it open. Then, oh, the relief!

The delight of an en suite bathroom goes far beyond being able to pee at will. It is the place we go to clean, to be refreshed, and to luxuriate. And it all depends on the availability of free-flowing clean water. Most people in developed counties take this for granted because almost none of the infrastructure that delivers our water and removes our waste is visible. But it is there, a vital network within our cities and surprisingly expensive to run, even in places like San Francisco, where water is so plentiful. Keeping waste contained and cleaning it up so it can be returned to our rivers and seas without polluting them require a lot of filtering machines, settling tanks, and reprocessing units. All of which costs money and energy. The less effluent you want out there polluting ecosystems, the more the effort costs, and the more water you need to dilute whatever's coming out of reprocessing plants. So dealing with the wastewater from dishwashers, washing machines, showers, baths, and toilets for a city the size of San Francisco is not easy. The drinking water supply also has to come from somewhere, which requires more filtering, pumping, and monitoring. Every time water goes round the loop, from clean to dirty and back again, it costs energy and creates an environmental impact through the creation of waste products.

Manufacturing also uses huge amounts of water, and so, in buying most products, you're also increasing your so-called water footprint. You may be someone who has a shower only twice a week and uses a low-flush toilet, but your water footprint is still likely to be substantial. It is estimated that the average American's water footprint for goods they purchase, and use only once, is 583 gallons per day, thanks to water-intensive goods like paper, meat, and textiles. Even seemingly mundane activities such as eating a hamburger, reading the newspaper, and buying a T-shirt have a big impact on a person's water footprint. Hence the sign in the hotel bathroom, reminding me that water is a valuable resource and encouraging me not to request new towels every day.

As the world population increases to ten billion over the next few decades, it is estimated that access to clean water will be an increasing struggle in many parts of the world. Currently one billion people lack access to clean water, and a third of the global population experiences shortages through the year. Without access to clean water, we can expect an increase in poverty, malnutrition, and the spread of disease. It should be emphasized that this issue affects big cities as well as rural communities. For instance, the Brazilian city of São Paolo experienced severe water shortages in 2015 when drought emptied its main reservoir. At the worst point of the crisis, it was estimated that the city, with a population of 21.7 million people, had only twenty days of water left. Many other megacities around the globe face similar problems imposed by variations in climate, growth in population, and, as wealth increases, a bigger water footprint per person.

While we obviously all rely on water, a sustainable and healthy society needs other liquids too. Some are surprising. For instance, liquid glass. A lot of our food and drink is preserved and transported in glass bottles or jars. It's a great material for that. Chemically inert, glass doesn't react with the contents it holds, so those products last longer. But glass does break, and when it does, it has to be melted down into a liquid again in order to be remade into another vessel. This has been happening for thousands of years: a circular system that allows us to reuse waste.

Glass, as a material for food and drink containers, does have its downsides. It is dense, so transporting it around the world costs a lot of energy. Also, remelting it requires a lot of energy because glass has such a high melting point. Because of these two factors, in a world powered largely by fossil fuels, glass containers end up exacerbating the problems caused by climate change.

Hence the shift in the twentieth century toward plastic packaging, which is lighter and more flexible and requires a great deal less energy to remelt into new packaging. That's the theory, anyway. The reality is quite different. Many, many different packaging plastics have been developed, each one amazing in its ability to preserve and package foods, liquids, electronics, and more. What no one thought through was what would happen if these plastics were all collected, recycled, and melted together. The mixture creates inferior plastic, unable to perform the jobs of the originals because the individual hydrocarbon molecules that make up a typical plastic chemically bond to one another in particular ways. This bonding creates certain structures inside the plastic, which determine its strength, elasticity, and transparency. If you melt together different plastics, you end up with a mess. Thus the plastics need to be carefully uncooked to make them usable again. Since there are more than two hundred plastics in common use, and any number of items on the market are packaged with two or three different types, all in a rainbow of colors, separating plastics has become a costly task. We haven't yet found a way of liquefying them to create a sustainable system.

Sadly, worldwide, the majority of plastic packaging is not recy cled, a fact that is steadily creating an environmental disaster. Our landfills are overflowing with plastics, and because plastic packaging is designed to be lightweight, it's easily carried off by the wind. And because plastics float, when they land in a river, they eventually make their way to the seas and oceans, contaminating those ecosystems. This is happening at an ever-increasing pace. At current rates, it is estimated that by 2050 there will be more plastic than fish in the oceans.

There is no easy answer to the problem of plastic packaging. Using glass, as already mentioned, requires a lot energy, which, unless it is generated with renewable power sources, is unsustainable. Paper is another possible replacement, but its production is more energy-and-water-intensive than plastic's. Using less packaging is an attractive possibility. But since most agriculture and manufacturing is highly water-intensive, less packaging may result in greater waste. Overall, this could easily put more pressure on global water and food supplies. Thus we find the problem of sustainable packaging has flowed full circle, as is often the way with things that rely on liquids.

And so I was expecting a lot from this conference on sustainable technology, which I had flown five thousand miles to participate in. Would the attendees be interested in our work on self-repairing cities and the 3D printing of tar, or would the discussion focus on cheaper ways to desalinate water or create sustainable packaging? Either way, I knew that understanding the behavior of liquids was going to be essential. I looked at my watch. The opening talk of the conference would be starting soon. I splashed some water on my face to stave off jet lag and headed downstairs to the convention center.

When I got there, I saw something I had not expected: Susan, striding onto the stage. My eyes almost popped out of my head. This person whom I knew so well—having spent eleven hours sitting next to her—was an engineer. And not just any engineer, but a keynote speaker of the very meeting I had flown halfway around the world to attend. She talked brilliantly, and wide-rangingly, about the complex global sustainability challenges facing us. But in truth I found it hard to concentrate, as I was so furious with myself for not talking to her on the plane.

After Susan's presentation, I couldn't resist going up to talk to her. I had to wait in line as she patiently dealt with the others crowding around her. When my turn came, I smiled and, trying to sound cool, said,「Nice talk.」

She looked at me, puzzled for a second, apparently trying to recall how she knew me. But then it clicked.「I suppose you want your pen back,」she said.

Epilogue

As I hope the account of my journey from London to San Francisco has shown, an airplane flight is made possible, and delightful, by our understanding and control of myriad liquids, from kerosene to coffee, from epoxies to liquid crystals. There are many liquids I haven't mentioned, but I wasn't trying to be comprehensive. Instead, I've tried to paint a picture of our relationship with liquids. For thousands of years we have been trying to come to grips with this alluring yet sinister, refreshing yet slimy, life-giving yet explosive, delicious yet poisonous state of matter. So far we have largely managed to harness the power of liquids while protecting ourselves from their dangers (tsunamis and rising sea levels notwithstanding). Looking ahead, I'm guessing that our future will be just as liquid-filled as our past, but our relationship with liquids will deepen.

Take medicine, for instance. Most medical tests require a sample of blood or saliva, which doctors use to diagnose illness or monitor health. These tests almost always have to be done in a lab, and they're both time-consuming and costly. They also require a visit to a doctor or a hospital, which is not always possible, especially in countries where medical resources are scarce. But a new technology called lab-on-a-chip is likely to change all this, ushering in a future in which diagnostics are carried out at home, almost instantly, and cheaply.

Lab-on-a-chip technology allows you to take small samples of your own bodily fluids and feed them into a small machine that examines their biochemical composition. These chips process liquids in much the same way that silicon microchips process digital information. Your blood, or whichever other fluid, is directed into a series of microscopic internal tubes, which can divert droplets in different directions, to undergo different kinds of analysis. It's still early days for these chips, but be prepared to hear more and more about them in the coming years. With the potential to diagnose everything from heart disease to bacterial infection to early-stage cancer, they're likely to be at the foreground of a revolution in medical technology akin to what we've seen in the IT industry—but this time, the revolution will be liquid.

In order for lab-on-a-chip technology to work, it has to have a mechanism that allows it to move and manipulate small droplets of liquid. Biological organisms, of course, are expert at this. Go into a garden during a rain shower and you'll see leaves that repel water so effectively that the raindrops bounce off. Lotus leaves, for instance, have long been known to have this super-hydrophobic property, but no one knew why until quite recently, when electron microscopes revealed something odd about their surface. As suspected, they're coated in a waxy material that repels water, but surprisingly, that material is arranged on the surface in the form of billions of tiny microscopic bumps. When a drop of water sits on this waxy surface, it tries to minimize its area of contact, because of the high surface tension between drop and surface. The bumps on the lotus leaf drastically increase this area of waxiness, forcing the droplet to sit up precariously on the tips of the bumps. In this state, the droplet becomes mobile and quickly slides off the leaf, along the way collecting small particles of dust, hoovering them up like a mini–vacuum cleaner: a lotus leaf's secret to staying shiny and clean.

Manipulating material surfaces to make them super-hydrophobic is likely to become big business in the coming years. This will allow us not only to guide droplets through the internal workings of lab-on-a-chip technology, but also to do a great many other things too. We will, for instance, be able to keep water from sticking to windows, thus keeping them as clean as a lotus leaf. We might also be able to develop waterproof clothing that harvests the water that falls on it, transporting it through tiny tubes into a collecting pouch, so it can be drunk later. This design is inspired by the thorny devil lizard, which hydrates itself by collecting any rainwater that falls on its skin, manipulating it through tiny channels by means of capillary flow.

The thorny devil lizard collects water through its skin by using hydrophobic materials and capillary flow.

The potential of such water-collection technology for the billions of people without access to regular supplies of clean water is huge, especially if a cheap way to filter the water can also be mastered. A new material that may be capable of this is called graphene oxide. It is a two-dimensional layer of carbon and oxygen atoms. In the form of a membrane it acts as a barrier layer for most types of chemical molecules but easily allows water molecules through. So it is like a molecular sieve. Potentially it could make an extremely effective and cheap water filter, which could even make seawater drinkable.

As we know, water is a life-giving substance, and it's generally accepted that the presence of liquid water is what allowed life on Earth to evolve from very basic chemical structures to the complex cells we are made of. But this is still a hypothesis; we don't really know with any certainty how it happened. Scientists all over the world are doing experiments in an attempt to work it out by re-creating the chemical conditions that were present when life evolved here four billion years ago. It seems most likely, at this point, that life originated at the bottom of our deep oceans. There, thermal vents create a complex chemical soup with many of the ingredients that we find in our cells. As the twenty-first century progresses, exploring these regions, and the deep sea in general, will be an important frontier for us. It's odd, really, that we know less about the bottom of our own oceans than we do about the surface of the moon.

If the depths of the ocean are our next physical frontier, I'd say that we have two computational ones on the horizon, both dependent on liquid. Cells and computers both compute information, but in completely different ways. Cells function and reproduce by computing the information stored in DNA via chemical reactions. Silicon-based computers, by contrast, read chips that contain billions of solid transistors, which react to incoming electrical signals transcribed from a computer program. The signals are communicated through a series of 1s and 0s, the binary language of digital computers. The transistors apply logic to the flow of 1s and 0s, computing answers again in the form of 1s and 0s and moving them to another part of the computer chip. It all may seem very basic, but by doing billions of simple calculations a second, sophisticated computation can be performed—the sort that beats chess grandmasters and computes the trajectory of a rocket to the moon.

When cells compute things, they use chemical reactions instead of transistors. Instead of 1s and 0s, they compute with molecules, and they communicate with molecules. There are no transistors or wires, just chemical reactions in the liquid state, swimming around inside the cells. These chemical reactions happen incredibly fast, and simultaneously, all over the cell, making this so-called parallel computing system extremely efficient. The molecules involved are also all very small—you can easily have a sextillion (1,000,000,000,000,000,000,000) molecules in a single drop of liquid, a potentially colossal source of computational power and memory.

Scientists are trying to emulate this process by using DNA to create a liquid computer. The work is developing rapidly, especially as ways to manipulate DNA and do calculations in test tubes are becoming more and more sophisticated and readily available. In 2013 researchers hit a big milestone: they were able to store a digital photograph's data in liquid and then retrieve it. This opens the door to a whole new paradigm of computation—in the future, you might be able to store all your data in a single drop of liquid.

Liquid computing is the first of the incredible computational systems that are in development. The second is quantum computing, which relies on the quantum versions of binary's 1s and 0s—meaning a piece of information is stored in the computer as both a 1 and a 0 until a computation has been completed. Quantum computing takes advantage of the rules of quantum mechanics, which allow all possible outcomes of an event to exist simultaneously. As such, all possible answers to a problem can be computed at once, vastly speeding up calculations. There are machines already that can do this, but they're still quite rudimentary. One thing is certain, though: to run, they rely on very cold temperatures that can be obtained only with the help of a very special liquid: liquid helium.

Helium is a gas until cooled to –452.2ºF; at this temperature, which is just seven degrees above absolute zero, it turns into a liquid. Luckily, we already have a sense of how to work with liquid helium, thanks to hospital equipment. If you've ever had a brain, hip, knee, or ankle injury, or been diagnosed with cancer, you've most likely had an MRI scan. But without super-cold liquid helium, these diagnostic tools, vital to all modern hospitals, would simply cease to operate. The cold temperatures of liquid helium are what make it possible for MRI machines to reliably detect tiny changes in the magnetic fields inside the human body and so map our internal organs. Unfortunately, though, although helium is one of the most abundant elements in the universe, it is quite rare on Earth. Hospital shortages of liquid helium now occur quite regularly and supplies often run out. In response, geologists are constantly prospecting for new sources of helium in Earth's crust (usually found in natural gas), but because of its growing importance, prices for this crucial substance have risen 500 percent in the past fifteen years.

