# 1201. Solid

THERE WAS A THUD , and the whole fuselage shuddered, making the sound of a thousand cupboards being shut. We all lurched forward and strained our seat belts as the captain cut the power on the jet engines and we decelerated from a landing speed of 130 miles per hour to 70, then to 40, then to 15, as we taxied off the runway. There was audible relief in the cabin; a few people clapped: we were back on solid ground.

Although solid is not really the right word, since, so far as planets go, Earth is not particularly solid. It started as a ball of hot liquid, and over the course of a hundred million years cooled enough for a thin crust of rock to form on the outside. That happened about 4.5 billion years ago, and our planet has been cooling ever since, but it's still fluid on the inside. It's the dynamic flow of liquid inside Earth that keeps our planet alive by creating our protective geomagnetic field. But this same fluidity is also a destructive force, causing earthquakes, volcanic eruptions, and the subduction of tectonic plates.

Right at the center of Earth there is indeed something solid — a core of metal made of iron and nickel, at a temperature of more than 9,000ºF. It's solid even at this temperature, which is thousands of degrees above its normal melting point, because the intense gravitational pressure at the center of Earth forces the liquid to form giant metal crystals. The core is surrounded by a layer of molten metal, again mostly iron and nickel, more than a thousand miles thick. The currents flowing inside this interior metal ocean are what produce Earth's magnetic field, which is so powerful that it extends outward, not just to the surface, where its force makes compasses work, allowing us to navigate, but also far into space. Out there, Earth's magnetic field acts like a shield, performing a vital role in protecting us from the solar wind and cosmic rays raining down on us. Without our magnetic shield, they would strip us of our atmosphere and water, and most likely kill off all life on the planet. Planetary scientists believe that Mars lost its magnetic shield some time ago, which is why it has no atmosphere and has become a cold, dead planet.

Surrounding our ocean of liquid metal is a layer of rock between 1,000ºF and 1,500ºF — the mantle. At these red-hot temperatures, the rock behaves like a solid over time periods of seconds, hours, and days, but like a liquid, over periods of months to years. This is to say the rock flows even though it's not molten — we call this type of flow「creep.」The major flows of this rocky mantle are convection flows: the hot rock near the liquid metal ocean rises up, and the colder rock closer to the crust sinks down. This is the same kind of flow you can see in a pan of water while it's heating up; the hot water at the bottom of the pan expands and becomes less dense than the colder water at the top of the pan, which sinks down to replace it.

On top of the mantle is the crust, which is like the skin of Earth. It's a relatively thin layer of cool rock, between twenty and sixty miles thick, and it's covered by all of the planet's mountains, forests, rivers, oceans, continents, and islands. And as the intercom went off once again, our flight attendant confirmed that we'd just landed on it.

「Ladies and gentlemen, welcome to San Francisco International Airport, where the local time is 3:42 p.m. and the temperature is thirty-seven degrees. For your safety and comfort, please remain seated, with your seat belt fastened, until the captain turns off the FASTEN SEAT BELT sign.」

At moments like this, the relief of being back on the ground might make you feel that the crust on which we live is a stable solid, which we can steadfastly rely on. Unfortunately this is not the case; the crust is essentially floating on the fluid mantle below, and to make the whole thing still more precarious, it's made up of separate pieces, called tectonic plates. The mantle's convection forces move the tectonic plates around, causing them to buckle as they bump into one another. There are seven major tectonic plates, which generally line up with the continents — so, for instance, the North American tectonic plate contains North America, Greenland, and all of the seafloor between there and the Eurasian tectonic plate, which contains most of Europe. All the tectonic plates move, but not in the same direction, and the places where they meet, called fault lines, are collision zones. As the plates push together, they rise up to form mountains. Where the plates pull apart, new crust is formed, as lava shoots up from the mantle below. The fault lines are also where the most violent earthquakes occur.

I'm sure my fellow passengers understood the danger — how could they not, if they lived in a place like San Francisco? The city is located at the fault line where the North American tectonic plate meets the Pacific tectonic plate, and so has a long history of major earthquakes, and there will surely be more to come. In 1906, an earthquake destroyed 80 percent of the city and killed more than three thousand people. There was another one in 1911, then another in 1979, and others in 1980, 1984, 1989, 2001, and 2007. And these are just the big earthquakes. There have been many more smaller disturbances in the crust in that time. Living in a place like San Francisco makes it clear how important it is to understand the fluid dynamics of our planet. Not only does it explain why massive earthquakes occur and reoccur in certain places, but it also helps us understand the factors that affect a vitally important related quantity: the sea level.

Because Earth's crust sits on top of fluid rock, if it's weighed down by, say, miles of ice, then it will sink into the mantle. This is what's happened to Antarctica and Greenland, which are both covered in one to two miles of thick ice. To get a better feel for the scale of these ice sheets, consider that the Antarctic ice sheet holds 60 percent of all the fresh water on the surface of the planet — approximately seven million trillion gallons of water, which weighs approximately twenty-eight thousand trillion tons. If global warming were to cause all that ice to melt, then the sea level of the oceans would rise by more than 160 feet, submerging every single one of the world's coastal cities and making hundreds of millions of people homeless. This seems obvious. What is less obvious is that the release of the weight of ice from Antarctica will de-stress the rocks underneath it, and those landmasses will decompress and bob up (this is called postglacial rebound). Greenland is in a similar situation: the crust below it is being weighed down by the million trillion gallons of water held in the ice sheet, and if all that melts, then the North American tectonic plate will rise. If the resulting increase in the height of the continent is greater than the rise in the sea level, then major flooding may be avoided. Working out what's more likely to occur is vitally important for our future, and especially for future generations, because if global warming intensifies, and it is well along the path to doing so, one of these scenarios will certainly play out.

At the moment, what we know is this. The mean global sea level has risen almost eight inches since the beginning of the twentieth century. Some of this has been due to the water thermally expanding as the oceans have got hotter, since hotter liquids take up more volume. Some of the rise has been due to the melting of the ice sheets over Greenland and Antarctica, and still more because glaciers in other parts of the world are melting too. The rising sea levels are global; they affect everyone with a coastline, from a tiny Pacific island, which will be entirely submerged, to a huge country like Bangladesh, where a three-foot rise in sea level would result in nearly 20 percent of the country being submerged, and thirty million people being displaced. On the other hand, the postglacial rebound affects only the coasts connected to the parts of Earth's crust weighed down by the ice sheets in Greenland and Antarctica. In other words, there will be winners and losers when Earth's ice melts, and it all depends on which part of it melts first: Greenland in the Northern Hemisphere, or Antarctica in the Southern Hemisphere.

If the ice melts in the Northern Hemisphere first, then Greenland will bounce up higher than the average sea level, as will the North American continent, so sea levels there will initially go down. The extra water will be distributed across all the oceans, while the increase in the height of the northern tectonic plates will be a local effect. If the opposite happens, and the Antarctic ice melts before the Greenland ice sheet does, then the southern tectonic plates will bounce up first, and the whole east coast of North America will be under water.

One of the big unknowns is how fast the ice will go, since it doesn't have to melt in order to disappear from continents. It can also creep: this is how glaciers move, flowing down mountains even though they are solid ice. How creep works is not so different from how viscous liquids ooze. When the force of gravity is applied to a molecule in a liquid, some of the weak bonds holding it together break, allowing it to move in the direction determined by the force. But it also needs to have space to move into, and if it can't find that, it exerts pressure on its neighboring molecules, prompting them to move. The structure of a liquid is mostly random, so spaces do often open up, allowing molecules to move and shuffle freely in response to forces, and the liquid to flow. The same thing happens in solids, but the molecules and atoms have relatively less energy to break the bonds holding them to their neighbors, so the process is dramatically slower. Solids also have a very orderly structure, so finding space for the atoms to move into is difficult. That's why they flow so slowly, and that's why we call it creep. You can speed up creep by putting solids under higher pressures, or by increasing their temperature; at higher temperatures, the atoms have more vibrational energy to break existing bonds and jump into whatever space may be available. This is what is happening to the ice sheets as global temperatures rise: whole mountains of ice are flowing, driven by gravity toward the sea.

In the form of glaciers, ice creeps relatively fast. In 2012, for instance, glaciers in Greenland were measured to be moving at a rate of ten miles per year toward the sea. They were moving so quickly because the ice sheets had reached temperatures between –50ºF and –100ºF. As cold as that may sound, that ice is only 82ºF–132ºF below its melting point of 32ºF. Which is to say that the energy of the H 2 O molecules inside the ice crystals is not very far from the temperature they need to be at in order to turn into liquid water. In contrast, the rocks that make up a mountain have melting points between 2,000ºF and 4,000ºF, so the atoms in the rocks of a large mountain are thousands of degrees below their melting point, and behave much more like a solid than a glacier does. Thus, mountains creep more slowly than glaciers, but they creep nevertheless; it just takes them millions of years to flow appreciable distances. Lower down in Earth's crust, temperatures are closer to the melting point of the rocks, which is why tectonic plates creep faster than mountains, at rates from less than one to almost four inches per year.

That may not sound like much, but now imagine that there's another tectonic plate pushing against the rock, and that the forces are acting over a fault line hundreds of miles long. Something has to give. If not, then year after year, the tension will keep building up until the rock ruptures and slides, causing a nearly instantaneous, enormous release of energy — an earthquake. The amount of energy released in the 1906 earthquake in San Francisco was equivalent to that of about a thousand nuclear bombs. The earthquake that caused the tsunami that hit Japan in 2012 released energy equivalent to that of twenty-five thousand nuclear bombs. It's this gigantic output of energy that makes the damage from earthquakes so widespread; one big earthquake, with an epicenter hundreds of miles away from any city, can still be devastating.

But that buildup of energy doesn't always create an earthquake; sometimes the rock creeps and, like two pieces of paper being pushed together, it slowly flows upward to release the pressure. This requires a huge amount of force, but then a huge amount of force is exactly what's produced by tectonic plates. It's that inexorable wrinkling that makes mountains. The great mountain ranges — the Alps, the Rocky Mountains, the Himalayas, and the Andes — are all located where tectonic plates meet, and all were formed through creep, over millions of years.

But not all mountains are made this way. Perhaps the most impressive way of making a mountain, and certainly the fastest, is through volcanic eruption. If you've not seen hot rivers of red molten rock bursting from the bowels of Earth, you really should try to, at least once in your life; it's one of nature's most awesome and humbling sights, a bit like going back in a time machine to the birth of the planet, where everywhere you'd look, there'd be burnt rock and black cinder, accompanied by the smell of sulfur, smoke, and ash.

The only time I've witnessed a live volcano, I very nearly got killed. I was living for a brief time in Guatemala, studying Spanish; it was the summer of 1992 and I was lodging with a family in the old city of Antigua, located in a mountainous jungle region on the Central America Volcanic Arc, a chain of volcanoes on the Pacific coast all created by tectonic activity. Over the past three hundred thousand years, it's estimated that seventeen cubic miles of mountain have been built up by the eruptions of these volcanoes. One of the most active in the region is Pacaya, which is close to Antigua and had its last major eruption in 2010.

When I was in Antigua, guides in the market square arranged unofficial visits to the volcano. The Guatemalan family I was staying with had warned me against going because in 1992 the country was still full of bandits and outlaws who regularly robbed any tourists who were young and foolish enough to go out into the countryside unarmed. But because I was young and foolish, I took no notice of their advice, and so off I went late one afternoon, in a truck full of equally young and foolish backpackers, driven into the jungle by two young Guatemalans. We got to the base of Pacaya as the sun was setting and began our climb up through the trees — only there weren't any trees because Pacaya, an active volcano, intermittently erupts, sending up plumes of smoke and ash and lobbing tons of molten rock into the air. These emissions had burned and destroyed all of the forest that had once grown around the cone, so where we were, at the bottom, there was just a steep slope of ash, punctuated every ten yards or so by blackened stumps. As we started hiking, we walked along this black mound of loose cinder, with foul-smelling smoke drifting all around us. It felt like a scene from the apocalypse. As we continued upward, the path got steeper, and it became harder to make progress through all the cinder. But we were eager and adventurous, and finally we made it to the top, just as darkness fell.

Soon it was pitch-black, and our guides motioned for us to stay behind a big rock near the edge of the crater while they moved forward to see what kind of mood Pacaya was in. They came back quickly, excited to tell us that she was awake and bubbling with lava. So we crept forward too. The smell of sulfur billowed up from the crater, which seemed to be somewhere between a hundred and two hundred yards below — I couldn't really tell. And then we saw the lava. It was one of those moments I will never forget — like seeing the inside of our planet for the first time. We were all transfixed, as if we were watching some wild animal in its lair. It was then that we heard some popping sounds. Our guides suddenly looked worried and conferred privately. There were more pops and some faint thuds. It seemed that Pacaya really was awake, and was shooting molten lava into the air — the thuds were the sounds of lava landing. Each spurt, I found out later, could have been two to four pounds in weight. We weren't wearing safety helmets, or heat-resistant clothing, or even boots (I was wearing sneakers). The guides told us the best thing to do in this situation was just to run, and we didn't need any persuading. I fled, terrified that the next pop would land a splat of molten lava on my head, and so I slid, and fell, down the mountain of cinders as fast as I could, all the while hearing the pop, pop, pop behind us. In the truck back to Antigua, our guides laughed — that was a close one, apparently. I finally understood why they weren't worried about bandits; they were a danger for sure, just not the biggest one.

But in the grand tectonic scheme of things, Pacaya's eruptions are minor. The planet's biggest volcano is Mauna Loa, on the Big Island of Hawaii, which it created with its magma. Most volcanic activity occurs under the sea. The Hawaiian Islands were all built by volcanic activity, and that continues today, making them a pretty dangerous place to live — a major eruption could shoot lava more than half a mile into the air and create a suffocatingly hot ash plume. A disaster on that scale wouldn't be unheard of. In 79 CE, Italy's Mount Vesuvius erupted, covering the ancient Roman cities of Pompeii and Stabiae with hot ash and killing many of the inhabitants almost instantly.

A plaster cast of one of victims of the eruption of Vesuvius.

And in 1883 Krakatoa, a volcanic island in Indonesia, erupted with an explosion so loud that it was reported thousands of miles away. It's estimated that the size of that explosion was equivalent to that of thirteen thousand atomic bombs, and it killed more than thirty thousand people. In the aftermath of the eruption it was found that most of the island had disappeared.

These massive eruptions are not just part of our past; they are also, unfortunately, an inevitable part of our future. For instance, a massive buildup of lava in an undersea volcano off the south of Japan has recently been detected. The slow seepage of its lava has built up a dome two thousand feet above the seabed. The previous super-eruption in this volcanic area, seven thousand years ago, devastated the Japanese islands. Another such eruption may be brewing and is likely to have a similarly massive impact on Japan, as well as filling Earth's atmosphere with ash. This ash will end up in the atmosphere for years, blocking out the sun and lowering temperatures across the whole world, creating a so-called global winter.

But here's the strange thing. Despite billions of years of volcano eruptions and billions of years of tectonic movement, Earth's mountains aren't very high. The view of Earth from space shows this most strikingly; from up there, it seems we live on an almost perfect billiard ball, with nothing big poking out: the mountains are all relatively insignificant wrinkles on a smooth orb, yet they've had billions of years to grow tall — so why haven't they done so? Well, there are two processes that are constantly making the mountains smaller. The first is erosion: rain, ice, and winds are constantly rubbing small particles off mountains, weathering them and grinding them down. And in addition to this, while the weight of the mountains increases as they grow, it produces a pressure on the rock below that, over time, creeps and flows, driving the mountains back into the crust. So just as the ice sheets weigh down Antarctica, the mountains weigh down the tectonic plates from which they came, and the bigger they grow, the more they sink.

Of course the cabin crew didn't mention any of this as we were landing, which is perhaps the best way to deal with living on an unpredictable planet that's constantly on the move. For as much as we may understand the underlying causes of an earthquake, no one can predict when the next one will hit San Francisco. Maybe it will be today, I thought, looking across at Susan. She didn't seem worried. She probably lives in denial, I thought, like the rest of us. How else can we live happily on this thin crust, stretched out over a fluid planet that generates forces that are incomprehensibly big — so big that they've built mountains over millions of years, and destroyed whole cities in minutes; forces that have spewed new islands into existence and gobbled up others; forces that have caused whole continents to sink under the weight of ice, the very ice that's now melting, causing sea levels to rise inexorably and threatening all coastal cities, including San Francisco. And none of these forces are going to stop because they're all driven by the fluidity and liquidity of the planet. To survive as a civilization and as a species, we will have to learn how to live with them.

Susan was doing just that, using the camera on her phone to guide the application of her red lipstick. I liked her style. I still didn't know who she was, what made her tick, or where she was going. I only knew one thing for certain: her name really was Susan — I had read it off her customs form, which she'd filled in using my ballpoint pen. A pen that she had now taken with her as she nimbly edged out into the aisle, pulled her overhead baggage down in one fluid movement, and headed to the exit. Meanwhile, over the intercom we received one final optimistic message:

「On behalf of the airline and the entire crew, I'd like to thank you for joining us on this trip, and we look forward to seeing you on board again in the near future. Have a nice day!」