8 / Cleansing

AS I STUMBLED TOWARD the loo, I felt more than a little uncertain on my feet; my bad knee clicked, and I occasionally lost my balance as the airplane rumbled through the stratosphere. There were blankets half-covering slumbering passengers, and as I progressed down the aisle, I got quick snapshots of my fellow passengers' viewing habits as they watched their liquid-crystal displays: a woman singing onstage; a judge wearing a wig, looking stern in a courtroom; Spider-Man leaping. Some people were sleeping, and some were tapping away at their laptops, their faces illuminated by their screens. When I finally got to the end of the aisle, the lavatories were all occupied and I had to wait in the corridor, with the cabin crew squeezing past me to serve the passengers in business class. I glanced enviously through the gap in the curtains that separated us and caught a glimpse of reclining passengers, being ministered to as if they were Roman emperors. Then I heard the click of the lock being slid back, and saw a bright light burst forth from the lavatory. A man quickly and impassively vacated the cubicle. Did I detect a slight look of apology on his face? I braced myself for a potentially horrible smell as I entered the stall but was relieved to find that the air smelled neutral, with a hint of synthetic lemon.

I lifted the toilet seat, had a long pee, and then pressed a button to initiate the vacuum flush mechanism. I always find this a little threatening. The sucking and roaring goes on a little too long, as if to say,「Yeah, who you looking at? I could suck you down this little hole too.」I turned to the basin to wash my hands and was confronted by two bottles with pump-action dispensers. I went for the one that looked more like soap and gave the bottle a couple of pumps; it squirted a clear yellow liquid into my hand. I've never really liked liquid soap; I object to the squirting action. It always reminds me of a small pet peeing with fright into your hand the moment you pick it up.

When I was growing up, liquid soap hadn't been invented. We just had bars of soap. These were so ubiquitous that basins were manufactured with indentations specifically designed to hold the soap so it wouldn't slip onto the floor or into the sink. Now bars of soap are in the minority, and becoming ever less popular. So is this progress? Is liquid soap really so much better than bars? Or is liquid soap just a modern fad, marketed to us on false pretenses, something that will eventually disappear, like flared trousers and CDs?

It's hard to say, without first understanding the advantages and disadvantages of normal soap. Soap is a miraculous substance. You can wash yourself with the clearest, purest, hottest water, but you will not get rid of any of the oily, grimy muck that's caked onto your skin. For most of history, we weren't unduly worried about this. People smelled; they were dirty. No one cared. We had bigger problems, and no sense of why soap might be important. Which isn't to say soap didn't exist. Recipes for making soap have been found on ancient Mesopotamian clay tablets dating as far back as 2200 BCE but this material has almost certainly been around longer. The process described is similar to how we make soap today: take ashes from a wood fire, dissolve them in water, and boil the solution with melted tallow (animal fat)—and magically you have a basic soap. While the Mesopotamians didn't necessarily use soap to bathe, they did use it to clean wool before weaving it into fabric. The soap removed the lanolin, a kind of grease, from the wool fibers.

But why would you use fat to remove grease? The secret is in the ash water; the Arabic word for it is alkali, which literally means「from the ashes.」Alkalis are the opposite of acids, but both are highly reactive and can transform other molecules. In this case the alkali transforms the fats.

One of the main constituents of tallow, a molecule called a triglyceride. This has three tails that can be snipped off, using alkali.

Fats, such as animal tallow, are made up of carbon molecules, with a three-armed chemical structure of glycerides bound together at one end by oxygen atoms. Their structure is completely different from water's much smaller H 2 O molecules. Water molecules are not just smaller than triglycerides; they are also polar, meaning the electric charges on the molecule are not distributed equally: there is a positive part and a negative part. This polarity is what makes water such a good solvent: it is electrically attracted to, and surrounds, other charged atoms and molecules, thus absorbing them. Water dissolves salt in this way, it dissolves sugar in this way, it dissolves alcohol in this way. But fat and oil molecules aren't polarized, so they can't dissolve in water. This is why oil and water don't mix.

The alkali produced from wood ash, however, splits into positive and negative components, so it dissolves in water. The resulting solution chemically reacts with the fat molecules, snipping off the three tails of the triglycerides, making them charged. This produces three soap molecules (called stearates). These hybrid molecules have an electrically charged head, which likes to dissolve in water, and a carbon tail, which likes to dissolve in oils—it's this hybrid nature that makes soap so useful.

The active ingredient in soap, stearate, showing its charged head, which is「water-loving,」and a carbon tail, which is「fat-loving.」

When soap molecules come in contact with a blob of oil, the carbon tail of the molecule immediately buries itself in it, thanks to their chemical similarities. But the charged head of the soap wants to get as far away from the oil as possible, so it ends up just sticking out of the blob. As more soap molecules do the same, they form a molecular structure that looks like a tuft of dandelion seed: a blob of oil surrounded by a cloud of soap molecules, with their electrically charged heads sticking out.

Soap cleans by the action of surfactant molecules, such as stearates. The fat-loving tail of the molecule is absorbed into oil, leaving the water-loving head sticking out. The cloud of water-loving heads surrounding the oil allows it to be dissolved in the water and so cleans a surface.

Because the blob of oil or fat has now got a charged surface, it's become polar, and so will dissolve happily in water. This is how soap cleans—it breaks up fat and oil residue on your hands and clothes into tiny spherical blobs, which can dissolve in water and be washed away.

The clean, dry feeling you get from washing your hands with soap comes from the soap's ability to remove oils from your skin. At the same time, soap is slippery precisely because of its own fatty nature—it's basically modified fat. That's why it slips out of your hand so easily. It is why soaps are used as lubricants—if you are trying to remove a ring from a swollen finger, soap can slip it right off.

Using soap to clean creates a special type of liquid; it's dirty water, yes, but it's made up not just of dirt, but also of balls of fat. In effect, it's one liquid suspended in another—an emulsion. Emulsions are very useful because they allow you to suspend many different types of liquid in water. Mayonnaise, for instance, is a very concentrated suspension of oil in water, and its ratio of oil to water is roughly 3:1. You make it by shaking the two together vigorously, until they form a cream. If you did only that, though, the liquids would separate, because as we know, oil and water don't mix. But if you add a soaplike molecule, it will stabilize the droplets of oil. For mayonnaise, the binding molecule comes from eggs. Egg yolks contain a substance called lecithin, which has a molecular structure very similar to that of soap (with a fat-loving tail and a water-loving head), and when you add them to your oil-water mixture, they bind it all together and make mayonnaise. Egg yolk can also clean your hands, just as soap does, and there are plenty of shampoo recipes that use egg yolk as an essential cleaning ingredient. Mustard is another substance that can emulsify oils—which is why if you add mustard to oil and vinegar, which otherwise don't mix well, it will form a stable emulsion known as a vinaigrette. All these active substances work in the same way, and they all have a shared name: they're interface molecules called surfactants.

But soap doesn't just remove oils and fats; it also removes the bacteria attached to those oils and fats. Washing your hands with soap is the single most effective way to protect against bacterial infection and viruses. But despite the efficaciousness of soap as a cleaning agent, and its discovery so early in human development, the regular use of soap for cleanliness and personal hygiene is a modern phenomenon.

Throughout history, different cultures took very different stances on the use of soap. The Romans didn't really use it, preferring to scrape off their sweat and dirt and then bathe in first hot, then cold water, to get clean. Their public baths were an important part of their culture, and relied on a sophisticated engineering infrastructure to provide hot and cold water. In Europe, after the Roman Empire collapsed, the infrastructure that kept the public baths going fell into ruin, and so bathing went out of fashion. In crowded cities and towns, which had limited access to clean water, bathing came to be considered a health risk. During the Middle Ages, many Europeans believed that diseases were spread through miasma and bad air. They thought that washing, especially with hot water, opened up the pores and made a person more susceptible to diseases, such as the bubonic plague, also known as the Black Death. There was also a moral component associated with washing at this time; to be holy, like a hermit or saint, involved rejection of comfort and luxury. Hence, the more you smelled, the closer to God you might be perceived to be.

These attitudes to cleanliness, which seem so peculiar now, were not the norm in other parts of the world, and so visitors from the East would have found even the royal Europeans bewilderingly smelly and dirty, just as we would, looking at them from our modern vantage point. But the cultural norms of the past often seem disgusting in hindsight. It wasn't that long ago that smoking was considered quite normal, and the smell of smoke was pretty much everywhere, in offices, restaurants, bars, and trains. I still remember a time when smoking was allowed on airplanes. Now we look back with a mixture of horror and puzzlement as to how we got ourselves into that predicament. Seen in this light, the era of filthy, smelly Europeans is perhaps not so surprising.

As with smoking, the consequences of general uncleanliness were not just aesthetic. In the nineteenth century, it was still normal practice for doctors to travel from bedside to bedside without changing their clothes or washing their hands after examining women during childbirth. This practice caused incredibly high rates of maternal and infant mortality during childbirth. In 1847 a Hungarian obstetrician, Ignaz Semmelweis, mandated that physicians at the hospital in Vienna where he worked scrub their hands with a chlorinated lime solution before touching patients, and saw the death rate there fall from 20 percent to 1 percent. Despite this evidence, doctors were still reluctant to accept the idea that they might be carrying infections on their hands and transferring them to their patients, thus causing an enormous number of deaths. It wasn't until the 1850s, when a British nurse, Florence Nightingale, took up her campaign for cleanliness that this attitude was really adopted, first in military hospitals and then more widely. Crucially, she gathered statistics and invented new types of mathematical charts to show her evidence to doctors, and to the public, about the causes of disease and mortality. Gradually, as scientific evidence mounted, germ theory was accepted more generally by nurses and doctors, and hygienic washing with soaps became common practice in hospitals. Of course, not all soaps are created equal, and soap's new role in keeping people clean and healthy came at a time when industrialization and marketing were combining to create our modern Western consumerist culture. Soap was ready to transition from a commodity into a commercial product.

At forty thousand feet, in a tiny airplane lavatory, I too was hoping to use soap to make a transition: from weary to refreshed, clean, and bright-eyed traveler. I washed my hands in the tiny basin and inspected myself in the mirror. My eyes were red, and the skin around them looked dry and wrinkly; my face appeared yellow and sickly. I checked the light bulb to see if it was bluish fluorescent. It was. Maybe that explains it, I thought. But then, on further inspection, I noticed, with horror, that I had a speck of yellow curry sauce on my shirt collar. Susan hadn't mentioned it, but then why should she? I instinctively tried to remove it with a bit of saliva. It was just under my chin, so I had to conduct the whole operation by looking in the mirror. But the enzymes in my saliva made no headway with the yellow (probably turmeric-based) spot; in fact, wetting my collar had just made the stain spread. After five minutes of dabbing, during which there were a few rattles at the lavatory door, I had only made it worse.

Laundry powder was one of the first industrial products based on soap. Everyone has to wash clothes, and the growing importance of hygiene and cleanliness shaped attitudes toward social status and class in the nineteenth century. If you wore dirty clothes to a party, or to church or to any other religious gathering, you were deemed not just poor and of low status, but increasingly you were also held to be immoral. No longer was it true that being smelly and dirty was a signifier of virtue. Germs and disease were now associated with unclean habits. So in 1885, when the Reverend Henry Ward Beecher declared that「Cleanliness is next to Godliness,」he was voicing a widely held belief that morality and spirituality had a physical manifestation, and soap was an indispensable aid to achieving this higher status.

At the same time, the spread of both railways and newspapers was bringing people together, making it possible to spread one message across a nation—soap brands were able to become national institutions. In the United States, Procter & Gamble (P&G) became the most powerful presence in the soap industry. Founded in Cincinnati in 1837 by two English immigrants, William Procter and James Gamble, the company was in the business of selling candles and soap, both made using tallow from the local meat industry. But as the nineteenth century progressed, the candle industry declined—first because of the popularity of whale oil, and then because of kerosene—while the market for soap grew. P&G invented Ivory soap and invested large sums in marketing it across the whole country, placing ads in national newspapers and magazines. Then, with the invention of the radio in the 1920s, P&G started sponsoring serial dramas. Their audience was mostly made up of women, alone at home during the day, washing clothes and doing housecleaning; these popular dramas came to be known by a term related to the product whose manufacturer sponsored them—「soap operas.」

The invention of the washing machine liberated people—primarily women—from the demanding social ritual of washing clothes, and with it came a whole new set of substances to clean our dirty laundry. Soap, the primary material used to wash clothes for almost five thousand years, suddenly got a chemical upgrade: it became detergent. Detergents are a cocktail of cleaning agents; they contain surfactants like soap, but also many other ingredients to make them more effective and less environmentally damaging. In soap, the charged, water-loving head of the molecule is attracted to the calcium in water, so if you live in a place with hard water, the calcium will attach itself to the soap and form scum, just as it does on tea. Soap scum, though, looks slightly different—it's the whitish substance you get on your hands when you wash them with a bar of soap. The scum isn't just inconvenient; it also uses up the soap, so less of the bar is ultimately available for cleaning. It can also leave an unattractive gray residue on clothes.

What to do about soapy scum? You have to make soap that's less attracted to calcium. Chemists discovered a new set of molecules similar to those of soap, with a water-loving head and a fat-loving tail; but with these new molecules they could carefully control the electric charges and make them less attracted to calcium: these were the new surfactants.

As demand for detergents grew, competition between manufacturers became intense. Companies employed the best chemists they could find in the hope of creating better ones. They developed detergents containing mild bleaches, which could better preserve whites by reacting with the molecules responsible for brown stains, and snipping them up chemically. They also put fluorescent molecules into washing powder; these molecules, called optical brighteners, attach to the fibers of white clothes and stay there after the wash. Optical brighteners absorb invisible ultraviolet light and emit blue light, giving fabric that「whiter than white」look that so many detergent companies advertise. You can see how they work if you go to a nightclub: the ultraviolet lights over the dance floor activate the fluorescent molecules in your white clothes, making them glow.

The range of surfactants expanded. Anionic surfactants (in which the water-loving head of the molecule is negatively charged, as in soap) were created not just to avoid scum formation and remove dirt, but also to keep dirt from redepositing itself on the clothes during the wash. Cationic surfactants (in which the water-loving head of the molecule is positively charged) were developed as fabric conditioners. And non-ionic surfactants (in which the water-loving head of the molecule is neutral) remove dirt even at low temperatures and are less foamy than most other surfactants. Avoiding foam is important; foam does not help to remove stains, and it is inconvenient for washing machines to fill up with foam, as it is hard to get rid of. In fact detergents often contain antifoaming agents, to suppress bubble formation.

Biological enzymes are added to most detergents in an effort to reduce the environmental impact of washing clothes. The enzymes help to chemically snip up the proteins and starches you find in stains. They're able to remove stains at lower temperatures, which makes low-temperature washing machines much more effective, thus saving energy, and money. We call the enzymes biological because they're derived from natural enzymes found in living systems that do a similar job of degrading and mopping up unwanted stuff in the body. In the UK there are two kinds of laundry detergents: bio and non-bio. The bio-detergents contain enzymes, and while these clearly wash cleaner, the non-bio detergents are still available because of a persistent myth—which has never been verified—that bio-detergents irritate skin.

We obviously care a lot about clean clothes. But we also want clean, shiny, fresh-smelling hair. Enter shampoos. The word shampoo came to the English language from India, where it referred to a type of head massage using oils and lotions. The practice was imported to Britain during colonial times and eventually came to mean a type of hair washing. The first modern shampoo was created in the 1930s by Procter & Gamble; it was called Drene. Made with new, milder liquid surfactants, Drene was packaged in a glass bottle with a bright green-and-purple label. At about this same time, Unilever, Procter & Gamble's primary rival, came into business. Rivalry between these two global firms has led detergent innovation ever since.

An early advertisement for commercial shampoo.

If you look at the ingredients in a bottle of modern shampoo, you are likely to see something called sodium lauryl sulfate, or its cousin, sodium laureth sulfate. These are the building blocks of most modern shampoos; they're both very effective surfactants that do not interact strongly with calcium in water, and so do not form scum. They also do something else that we've come to consider an essential part of shampoo—they foam. And they do it very, very well.

Sodium lauryl sulfate (SLS)—notice the water-loving head and the fat-loving tail.

When you're using shampoo, foam is created while you're scrubbing, trapping air in water as you lather. The air tries to escape from the water, and when it reaches the surface of the liquid, it forms a bubble. If you're scrubbing your hair without any surfactants, the bubble will just be a thin film of pure water, which has a high surface energy with air, and so it will quickly pop. But all that changes when you add a surfactant like sodium lauryl sulfate to the mix. The surfactant's molecules will easily collect in the thin film of water that surrounds the bubble, lowering the surface energy of the liquid so much that the liquid film becomes relatively stable. As you massage the shampoo into your hair, these more resilient bubbles will keep forming, resulting in a buildup of foam. Because the surfactant is simultaneously gathering up all the oil and grease, we associate the cleaning with the foaming and judge the effectiveness of a shampoo by its foaminess. Modern ads stress this, but the foam does not help the shampoo to clean more thoroughly. Its role is purely aesthetic.

Sodium lauryl sulfate and its family of surfactants work so well and are so cheap that they've found their way into pretty much every type of cleaning product. They aren't just in shampoo, but also in cleaning liquids, laundry detergents, and even toothpastes—that's why your mouth fills with foam when you brush your teeth. Again, the role of the foam is purely for show— Look, I'm cleaning my teeth! it says. Because of its success, sodium lauryl sulfate ultimately supplanted bars of soap as the main way to wash the rest of the body in the shower—it heralded the advent of so-called body washes. They were distributed, just like shampoos, in small bottles and squeezy containers. And because the sodium lauryl sulfate family of surfactants is transparent, these products look great in transparent bottles, especially if you color them and scent them, as you might do for shampoo.

The appeal of body washes wasn't just aesthetic, though. When you're in the shower or the bath, bars of soap have disadvantages. As soon as they're wet, they become incredibly slippery. If you're taking a bath in an area with hard water, and you're using a bar of soap, not only do you end up sitting in scum water as the soap reacts with the calcium in the water, but you also risk losing the soap altogether if it slips from your hand into the cloudy water. And if you're in the shower when the soap slips out of your hand, it usually shoots off, pinging its way around the tub like a ricocheting bullet, potentially landing underfoot, where you might step on it, lose your balance, slip, and brain yourself. Not so with shower gel.

Shower gel also has the advantage of being contained within a bottle. Bar soap has to sit somewhere, usually on an exposed surface, where it sloughs off its outer skin of foam and slimy scum, giving it an unappealing, and certainly not very telegenic, appearance—unlike liquid soaps, which maintain their media-friendly appeal through every use. And even once it's dry again, bar soap never quite returns to its pleasing appearance straight from the wrapper; after just one use, the bar is misshapen.

In the 1980s a company called Minnetonka started thinking about ways of bringing liquid soap out of the shower and onward to bathroom and kitchen sinks. But they knew the product needed to feel different—it couldn't be like shampoo or body wash, and certainly not like cleaning liquid—even though it would, in fact, be very similar. They had to sell it to people as new, and entirely appealing. They hit on the idea of pump dispensers, and that turned out to be a stroke of genius. Anyone who had previously worried about picking up a bar of wet soap, which had already been used by the previous person in the bathroom, could now enjoy the experience of having pristine detergent dispensed straight into the palm. The concept didn't catch on right away, though. Not everyone was impressed—for some it seemed to be an overly complicated solution to a non-problem. Others agreed with me—they didn't like the sensation that a small animal was pissing on their hand.

But if the public felt ambivalent about liquid soaps in the 1980s, the 1990s tipped the balance firmly in their favor: a bacterium called Staphylococcus aureus , which typically infects wounds after surgery, had, over time, developed strains that resisted antibiotics, making them very hard to treat. These strains were first discovered in the 1960s, but by the 1990s Staphylococcus aureus resistant to treatment by the antibiotic methicillin had become an epidemic in hospitals. In the UK, methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) infections accounted for 50 percent of all hospital infections. There were similarly high rates across Europe and the United States, leading to a sharp increase in hospital mortality. By 2006, the UK had seen two thousand deaths due to MRSA, and hospitals were struggling to deal with the spread of the bacteria. Fortunately, thanks to stricter handwashing regimens—in particular, requiring nurses and doctors to wash their hands after contact with patients—the rate of death has gone down over the past decade.

Outside the hospital, though, a public-health campaign began, extolling the benefits of clean hands, and it hinged on the promotion of antibacterial soaps, which, along with sodium lauryl sulfate and its cousin molecules, contain agents like triclosan, an antimicrobial molecule. These soaps were marketed as superior to traditional soap at preventing the spread of germs. The marketing was successful—the demand for antibacterial soaps was enormous, despite the fact that no evidence proved that they were more efficacious than conventional soap and water. In fact, Dr. Janet Woodcock, director of the US Food and Drug Administration's Center for Drug Evaluation and Research, has said that certain antimicrobial soaps may not actually provide any health benefits at all.

「Consumers may think antibacterial washes are more effective at preventing the spread of germs, but we have no scientific evidence that they are any better than plain soap and water,」she said in an official statement.「In fact, some data suggests that antibacterial ingredients may do more harm than good over the long term.」

In 2016, antibacterial soaps were banned in the United States. But since then, liquid soaps have infiltrated everywhere. Stripped of their antibacterial agents, liquid soaps now account for the majority of soaps bought in the UK and the USA. They're still in our hospitals, our homes, and yes, our airplane lavatories, where I was now spurting some into my hand.

Bong, went the plane's intercom.

「This is the captain speaking. We're about to encounter some turbulence, so I've put on the FASTEN SEAT BELT sign. Would all passengers please return to their seats. Thank you.」

Being addressed while you're in the lavatory feels a bit strange. Prior to that moment, I'd had a feeling of complete privacy, but that was shattered by a sense that the captain had just popped his head round the door. The paranoid part of my brain even considered that the announcement might just have been a ploy to get me out of the lavatory, where I'd been spending so much time reading the ingredients on the back of the liquid-soap bottle.

The liquid soap I was using did in fact contain sodium laureth sulfate. Most likely it was made from palm kernel oil or coconut oil. These trees flourish in tropical climates and have become incredibly important to the global economy because they are easy to grow and have a high yield of oil, making them stable and profitable crops for countries with a suitable climate. Fifty million tons of palm oil are produced annually, and that goes into everything from cakes to cosmetics—next time you're in a supermarket, take a look at the ingredients of cookies, cakes, chocolate, cereal, and on and on. You will very likely find palm oil in all of them.

A sketch of the structure of lauric acid, which is often obtained from palm kernel oil.

Palm kernel oil is particularly useful for making liquid soap because of its unusual chemical composition. It contains a lot of lauric acid, a twelve-carbon-chain molecule with a carboxylic acid group at the end. It looks a lot like a surfactant, but without a charged end. That's easily fixed, though, chemically speaking. Its size is what is important. Lauric acid, when used to make a surfactant, creates a hydrocarbon molecule that's much smaller than the ones found in normal soap, which are typically eighteen carbon atoms long.

Lauric acid, being smaller itself, produces a smaller surfactant and is lighter and more effective as a foaming agent. In fact, it's almost too good. Our delight with these liquid soaps has led to a huge increase in their production, and thus in the demand for palm oil and coconut oil. As a result, large sections of the rainforest in the countries where the oils are made, such as Malaysia and Indonesia, have been cut down; their immense biodiversity has been replaced with a monoculture of palm trees. This has all sorts of negative impacts, not least among them the destruction of habitat for wild animals, many of them already endangered, and the displacement of indigenous communities, who have been marginalized for centuries. Such is the demand for liquid soaps, though, and for the other products made of palm oil, that this process continues.

And to add insult to injury, detergents made with sodium laureth sulfate, which we go to such lengths to make, can actually work too well for some people. They remove fats and oils so well that they cause skin irritation, such as eczema and dermatitis. To prevent this, liquid-soap manufacturers add modifiers and moisturizers to their soaps, which replace the natural oils that the sodium laureth sulfate pulls out of your skin. You could almost be glad, then, that most of the liquid soap that's used just ends up going down the sink, without even interacting with your hands. Liquid-soap manufacturers have tried to address this by increasing the viscosity of the soap, and also by creating dispensers that squirt the soap out not as a liquid, but as a pre-formulated foam, which is more useful. The foam dispensers are actually rather good, not just because they dispense the tiny amount of surfactant you need, along with a lot of air, but also because they've finally created an active use for foam. It's not just aesthetic, as it is in shampoos, body washes, and toothpastes. In foam dispensers, the foam is the medium that carries the surfactant to your hands.

All in all, liquid soaps, of varying sorts, have become a hundred-billion-dollar industry. We rely on detergents to keep ourselves clean and scented, to keep our clothes clean and scented, to keep our hair clean and scented, to wash our dishes, and, perhaps most important in a highly populated world, to keep ourselves healthy and to stop the spread of disease—using soap is one of the most powerful ways to do this. But when we buy liquid soaps, we're mostly paying for their marketing; the essential ingredients of detergents, the ones that do the cleaning, are cheap—all the more reason to consider how these products are being made, and their impact on forests in the tropics.

Me, I love a bar of soap. It's hand-sized, and washing with it gives me the feeling of material contact, which I find reassuring and comforting. Yes, bars of soap are hard to market, but that's part of what I like about them—you buy a bar of soap because you need it, not because you think it's going to make you into a different, more successful, more desirable or sexy person.

The airplane was now rocking and bouncing around in an alarming manner. There was a sharp tap on the door, and a flight attendant asked me if I was OK. I worried for a moment that I might have been in the lavatory for hours, ranting to myself about the rise of liquid soap, but then I realized the attendant was referring to the turbulence. Time to get back to my seat, I thought.

But before I left the cubicle, I hesitated, my hand hovering by the second bottle by the sink. This contained another liquid, a moisturizer. Why was it there? Do we really need to moisturize our hands every time we wash them? Is this also part of the increasing pressure to consume products, regardless of whether we really need them—making soaps that clean hands too well, and then providing the antidote, a moisturizing cream? Or was I just being paranoid? I tried a squirt of it anyway; it was a nice-looking bottle, and I found the lemony fresh scent ridiculously hard to resist.

