4 / Sticky

IT DOESN'T MATTER HOW many times I experience turbulence on a plane; I can never seem to stop the seeds of panic forming in my brain. Rationally, I knew the wings weren't going to snap—we were flying in one of the most technologically advanced passenger aircraft ever made. I've even visited the factory where the wings are glued together and seen them being mechanically tested. But despite this, the rational part of my brain was being ignored by my panicking neurons. I know I'm not alone in this. Over the years, I've learned not to talk about the aircraft being glued together to other passengers; they generally don't find that reassuring.

Many liquids are sticky—that is, they will stick to you if you put your finger in them. Oil sticks to us, water sticks to us, soup sticks to us, honey sticks to us. Thankfully, they stick to other things better than to us, which is why towels work. When you have a shower, water trickles down your body, sticking to your skin instead of bouncing off, allowing it to follow the curves of your chest, belly, and bum in defiance of gravity. This stickiness is due to the low surface tension between the water and your skin. When the water comes in contact with the fibers of a towel, they act as little tiny wicks—just as candle wicks suck up liquid wax—so the micro-wicks of the towel suck the water off your body. Hence, your skin gets dry, and the towel gets wet. The stickiness of liquids, then, is not a property intrinsic to any particular liquid. It is determined by how liquids interact with a particular material.

However, just because something is sticky doesn't mean it can be used to glue an aircraft together. Wet your finger and dab it on a speck of dust, and it will stick to you, and remain sticking to you until the water evaporates. That water loses its stickiness when it evaporates is why, although it is sticky, it can't be considered a glue. Glues start off as liquid and then, generally speaking, turn into a solid, creating a permanent bond.

This is a materials process that humans have been playing with for a very long time. Our prehistoric ancestors made pigments from the powder of charcoal or naturally occurring colored rocks like red ocher, and used them to draw pictures on the walls of caves. To get the pigments to stick to the walls, they mixed them with sticky things like fats, wax, and egg, and so invented paints. Paints are essentially colored glues, and these earliest ones were permanent enough to last for thousands of years. Some of the oldest cave paintings still in existence are in the Lascaux caves in France, estimated to be about twenty thousand years old.

An ancient charcoal-and-ocher cave painting of Megaloceros, an extinct genus of deer.

Tribal cultures have long used these colored sticky substances as face paints, a central part of both sacred rituals and warfare. The tradition continues today with the modern cosmetics industry. Lipstick, for instance, is made up of pigments mixed with oils and fats that allow the color to stick to your lips—hence the name. Getting the glue to stick to your lips for hours, but still be easy enough to remove at the end of the day, has always been an issue; ditto for eyeliner and any other kind of makeup. The problem illustrates one of the main themes in glue design—namely, that unsticking is often as important as sticking. But more on that later—mastering sticking is hard enough for now. If you want to stick something together that needs mechanical strength, like the components of an ax, a boat, or indeed an airplane, then you need something stronger than paint or lipstick.

In the summer of 1991, two German tourists discovered the mummified remains of a man while walking in the Italian Alps. He turned out to be five thousand years old and was later nicknamed Ötzi. His remains were extremely well preserved because they'd been encased in ice since his death, as were his clothes and tools: he wore a cloak made of woven grass, and a coat, a belt, leggings, a loincloth, and shoes, all made of leather. All of his tools were ingeniously designed, but with respect to glue, it's Ötzi's ax that's the most interesting. Made of yew wood, with a copper blade, the ax was bound together with leather straps stuck on with a birch resin. This gummy substance is produced by heating up birch bark in a pot, yielding a brownish-black goo that was widely used as an adhesive in the late Paleolithic and Mesolithic periods. It works for making heavy tools like an ax because when it cools, it forms a tough solid. Our ancestors used it to attach an arrowhead to a shaft, to make flint knives, to repair pottery, and to make boats. The liquid is mostly made from a family of molecules called phenols.

The molecular structure of 2-methoxy-4-methylphenol, which is one of the constituents of birch-bark glue. The hexagon of carbon and hydrogen atoms joined to an –OH hydroxyl group is the hallmark of a phenol.

The chemical name may be unfamiliar, but I'm sure you would recognize the smell: the major phenol in birch-bark glue is 2-methoxy-4-methylphenol, which smells of smoky creosote. Phenol aldehyde smells of vanilla. Ethyl phenol smells of smoky bacon; indeed, whenever you smoke fish or meat, it's the phenols that give it that distinctive flavor.

When you heat up the birch bark, you extract the phenols. The thick resin that's produced is basically a mixture of a solvent called turpentine and phenols. The turpentine is the base of the liquid, but over the course of a few weeks the turpentine evaporates. This leaves just the phenol mixture, which turns from a liquid into a hard tar sticky enough to bond wood to leather and other materials.

As it turns out, trees are excellent purveyors of sticky things. Pine trees exude nodules of resin that also make good glues. An adhesive popular for a thousand years, gum arabic, comes from the acacia gum tree. The resin of trees of the genus Boswellia is a particularly nice-smelling glue called frankincense. Myrrh, another aromatic resin, comes from a thorny tree of the genus Commiphora . Resins were often used in medicines as well as in perfumes, perhaps because their active chemical components, like phenols, had potent antibacterial properties. Frankincense and myrrh were so highly valued in antiquity that they were given as presents to queens, kings, and emperors, which is why their presence in the Christian nativity story is so significant.

The stickiness of tree resins is no accident. They evolved to be sticky so they could trap insects, and therefore provide a valuable form of defense for the trees. The gemstone amber is actually fossilized tree resin, and often there are insects and bits of debris trapped inside it, perfectly preserved.

An ant trapped in amber, a fossilized tree resin.

Without tree resins, it would have been very hard for our earliest ancestors to make tools and equipment, and so for our civilization to get off the ground. Nevertheless, you wouldn't want to glue an airplane together with them—they would certainly crack during flight. Phenol molecules don't bond very strongly to other substances—the molecule itself is too self-contained, too happy with sticking to itself.

But once you're in the trees, you don't need to look very far for stronger glues. Consider birds: their wings are not bolted or screwed together. Their muscles and ligaments and skin are bonded via families of molecules called proteins. Our bodies are joined together with them too. One of the most important of these proteins is called collagen. It is common to all animals and relatively easy to extract. Early humans used skins of fish and hides of wild game—they separated the fat and then boiled the skins in water. This extracts the collagen from the animals and creates a thick, clear liquid that turns into a solid, stiff material when it cools: gelatin.

The collagen proteins in gelatin are long molecules made from a carbon-and-nitrogen backbone. In animals, collagen molecules stick together to create strong fibrils that make up tendons, skin, muscles, and cartilage. But once they've reacted with hot water in the glue-making process, the collagen molecules separate. They now have chemical bonds to spare, which they want to satisfy. In other words, they want to stick to something else—they've become the animal glue gelatin.

How the structure of collagen fibril is transformed to become the animal glue gelatin.

It was animal glues that replaced wood resins as the mainstay of early human technologies. The Egyptians, for instance, used animal glue to make furniture and decorative inlays. In fact, it appears that the Egyptians were the first people to use glue to get around one of the main mechanical problems of working with wood—that it has a grain.

The density and arrangement of the cellulose fibers in wood give it its grain, which is determined not just by the biology of trees but also their growth environment. Thus the grain varies from species to species and from tree to tree. The upshot: wood is strong across the grain but has a tendency to crack along the grain. This is not a big deal if you are splitting logs for a fire, but if you are building a house, a chair, a violin, an airplane, or pretty much anything out of wood, it presents a design problem. The thinner the piece of wood, the more likely that it will crack. Counterintuitively, the solution to this problem is to cut the wood into even thinner pieces, called veneer.

The Egyptians were the first to make veneer. They stuck thin pieces of it on top of one another, so that the grain of each layer was perpendicular to the one above. This structure didn't tend to crack in any direction: we now call it plywood. The Egyptians used animal glues to stick the plywood together, and that worked reasonably well. But if you've ever cooked with gelatin, you know that animal glue dissolves in hot water. Unless kept absolutely dry, fur niture made with animal glues falls apart. This seems like a huge defect, but Egypt is and was a very dry place, and so they managed.

And as mentioned earlier, there are in fact distinct advantages to a glue that can be unstuck. Historically, the designers of classic musical instruments, like Antonio Stradivari, known as the greatest violin maker of all time, used animal glue to construct their instruments. This would have allowed Stradivari to unstick any faulty joints during production, and so build almost perfect instruments. Today, in order to repair a wooden instrument, craftspeople unstick the joints with steam. This causes the bond between the glue and the wood to weaken and then dissolve. Thus, the wood comes away undamaged and clean, extending the life of the instrument and increasing its value. Indeed, most people who work in furniture restoration use animal glues precisely because they can be easily unstuck by using heat.

But when it comes to making wings, heat can be a real problem, or at least that's what legend tells us. Just look at what happened to the mythical king Minos, who ruled the Mediterranean island of Crete. The sea god Poseidon gave the king a very beautiful snow-white bull. King Minos was instructed to sacrifice the bull to honor Poseidon, but he sacrificed a different one instead because he did not want to kill the more beautiful bull. To punish him, Poseidon made King Minos's wife fall in love with the bull, and the offspring of that union was a creature that was half man and half bull—a Minotaur. This Minotaur grew up to be a terrifying beast that ate humans, and so King Minos got his master craftsman Daedalus to construct a prison for the Minotaur, in the form of an elaborate maze called the Labyrinth. To prevent Daedalus from telling others about the secrets within this structure, King Minos imprisoned him in a tower, along with his young son, Icarus. Daedalus, though, was a hard man to contain. He constructed wings by gluing feathers together with wax: one pair for himself and one for Icarus. On the day of their escape Daedalus warned his son not to fly too close to the sun. But during their flight Icarus was so exhilarated that he began to soar higher and higher. The wax melted, the feathers came unstuck, and Icarus fell to his death.

The fall of Icarus, which perpetuates the myth that he fell because the wax holding his wings together melted.

If you are wondering whether a modern aircraft could come unglued as it flies higher and higher, I should point out that the myth of Icarus defies logic. By flying higher, Icarus would have experienced colder, not hotter, temperatures. Temperature decreases by 1.8ºF for every thousand feet of altitude you gain because the atmosphere is cooled by the radiation of heat into space. At forty thousand feet, the altitude my plane was flying at, the temperature outside my window was approximately –60ºF, a temperature at which all waxes remain solid.

I should also say at this point that modern aircraft are not glued together with wax—nowadays we have much better glues. The intellectual journey of how they were discovered starts with rubber. Rubber is, of course, another sticky tree product. It's extracted by tapping the bark of the Pará rubber tree, which is indigenous to South and Central America. Mesoamerican cultures made many things with it, including the bouncing balls they used in ritualistic games. When European explorers reached the continent in the sixteenth century, they were amazed by rubber. They had never seen anything like it: it has the softness and pliability of leather, but is far more elastic and completely resistant to water. But despite its obvious value, no one in Europe could find an immediate economically viable use for it. Then the British scientist Joseph Priestley found that it was good for rubbing pencil marks off paper—which is how rubber got its name.

Natural rubber consists of thousands of small isoprene molecules bonded together in a long chain. This molecular trick of linking together units of the same chemical to make a completely different one is common in nature. These types of molecules are called polymers— poly , meaning「many,」and mer, meaning「unit.」Isoprene is the mer in natural rubber. The long polyisoprene chains in rubber are all jumbled up like spaghetti. The bonds within each chain are weak, which is why there is not much resistance if you pull rubber: the chains just unravel. This is what makes rubber so stretchy.

The structure of natural rubber, which consists of a jumble of long polyisoprene molecules.

It's rubber's stretchiness that makes it so sticky. It can be molded easily and wedged into any space, including the crevices in your hand; this stretchiness makes it grippy. Therefore rubber is the perfect covering for the handlebars of a bicycle: it prevents your hands from accidentally slipping off, but you don't need to worry about getting stuck to the bike forever. The same goes for making car tires—rubber lets the car adhere to the road strongly enough to create the friction needed to move the wheels forward, but not so strongly that the car gets stuck to the road permanently.

One little-known but especially ingenious use of rubber is on Post-it notes. Post-its have an adhesive layer of rubber that remains stuck to the notes when you pull them from their pad, so they can be attached to walls, tables, computer monitors, books, and more, without damaging these surfaces or leaving a mark. The microscopic spheres of rubber that make up the glue on the Post-it bond strongly to the note itself, but when pressed onto a surface, they create only a small adhesive force. Which is why, when you pull the Post-it off whatever it's stuck to, the rubber stays put on the paper. Thus, the Post-it is repositionable and reusable. Genius? Well, actually, this not-very-sticky glue was in fact an accidental invention. In 1968 Dr. Spencer Silver, a chemist with the 3M Company, stumbled upon it while he was trying to make a super-strong adhesive.

Many other culture-changing adhesive products emerged in the twentieth century. One of the most important was sticky tape, invented in 1925 by another 3M Company inventor, Richard Drew. Drew's tape is composed of three key layers. The middle layer is made of cellophane, a plastic made from wood pulp that gives the tape its mechanical strength and transparency. The bottom layer is an adhesive, and the top layer—the crucial layer—is a nonstick material such as Teflon, which has a high surface tension with most other materials and so cannot be easily wetted by them (which is why we use it in nonstick pans). Its use in tape really is genius; it means the tape can be placed on top of itself without permanently sticking to itself, allowing it to be manufactured as a roll. And a roll of tape—well, what home is complete without one?—or ten, in my case.

You can tell a lot about someone from how they handle a roll of sticky tape. I have to admit straightaway that I'm a tearer, not a cutter. Ask me for a bit of tape, and I'll grab the roll and enthusiastically try to rip off a piece for you. I probably won't get it right the first time. Most likely I'll mangle a few pieces first, either tearing them off at a crazy angle or snapping them off clean, and inevitably I will somehow allow the sticky parts to get stuck to one another. I'm not proud of this; it actually sends me into a rage. I get increasingly furious with the tape, which in turn seems to goad me by sticking itself back onto the roll so seamlessly that I can't find the end. At this point I have to resort to running my thumb around the roll, trying to locate the end by feel alone. This sometimes takes so long that I start shouting at the tape. Then I throw it across the room—and wonder why it is that I still don't own a tape dispenser.

Gaffer tape suits my personality better. It's designed to tear without scissors. It's reinforced with fabric that runs across the roll, and makes the easy tear possible. The strength of the tape comes from the fabric's fibers, while the stickiness and flexibility come from the plastic and adhesive layers. I love gaffer tape so much, I confess I envy people with jobs that require them to carry it around with them on their belt. Thinking of this, I snuck a glance at Susan, who was still watching a film, and wondered what kind of tape she might favor. Her book, The Picture of Dorian Gray by Oscar Wilde, was lying on the tray table in front of her. I noticed the spine had been repaired with what looked like red electrical tape. The ends of the tape were clearly cut with scissors: so she was that kind of person.

The sticky tape pioneered by Richard Drew, although a useful invention, is not the technological innovation that led to the modern aircraft. That came from another American chemist, Leo Baekeland, who succeeded in making one of the first plastics. He made his plastic by combining two liquids. The first was based on phenols, the main constituent of birch resin, and the other ingredient was formaldehyde, an embalming fluid. These two liquids react together to produce a new molecule that has a spare bond for more phenols to attach themselves to, which in turn produces bonds for still more reactions with more phenols. Eventually the whole liquid (if you get the proportions right) is chemically locked together into a solid. In other words, the reaction makes one giant molecule, and all the bonds holding it together are permanent, so whatever object you've created will be hard and strong.

Baekeland used this new plastic to create a number of objects such as telephones, which had just been invented. This was, of course, immensely useful and made Baekeland a fortune. But it had another impact. Chemists realized that the phenol and formaldehyde could be mixed and applied to the interface between two things—gluing them together as it hardened. This was the beginning of a whole new family of glues called two-part adhesives, which were stronger than anything that had come before.

How two liquids, phenol and formaldehyde, create a strong adhesive.

The more people used these two-part adhesives, the more they understood just how useful they were. First of all, the different components—phenol and formaldehyde—could be stored in separate containers, and thus remain liquid until they needed to be used. And then, beyond that, you could alter their chemical composition through additives, and make them better or worse at wetting and then sticking to different materials, such as metals or wood.

This new type of glue had a big effect on the world of engineers. They returned to thinking about plywood, first developed in ancient Egypt. If you made plywood using a two-part adhesive perfectly designed to bond with wood, you'd have plywood that was neither held together with the weak bonds of animal glue nor sensitive to water. But for this new plywood to take off, a strong market demand was needed. The simultaneous development of the aircraft industry provided just that. In the early twentieth century, most planes were made of wood, but because of wood's grain, they were liable to crack. Plywood was the perfect solution—it could be molded into aerodynamic shapes and, thanks to the new two-part adhesives, was both reliable and resilient.

The most famous plywood airplane ever built was the de Havilland Mosquito bomber. When it was introduced during World War II, it was the fastest aircraft in the sky. Because it could outrun every other plane, it wasn't even outfitted with defensive machine guns. It remains, to this day, perhaps the most beautiful plywood object ever made. Its elegance and sensuousness come from plywood's ability to be molded into complex shapes while its glues set, a property that made it popular among designers for decades.

A photo of a de Havilland Mosquito bomber, which was made of plywood.

After the war, plywood continued to revolutionize our world—this time with furniture. Two of the most innovative designers at the time were the married couple Charles and Ray Eames, who used plywood to reimagine wooden furniture. Their designs, particularly what is now known as the Eames chair, became classics, and are still made and imitated today. Go into any café or classroom and you are likely to see them. Other fashions in furniture have come and gone, but plywood has retained its appeal.

A plywood chair designed by Charles and Ray Eames.

But while plywood furniture stood the test of time, aeronautical engineering had to move on. After the war, aluminum alloys became the preeminent material for making aircraft, not because they were stronger by weight than plywood, or even stiffer by weight than plywood. No, aluminum won out because it could be more reliably manufactured, pressurized, and certified, especially as planes became bigger and started to fly higher. It's very hard to stop plywood from absorbing water or from drying out. Plywood aircraft that spent a lot of time in arid countries would eventually dry out, causing the material to shrink and putting stress on the glued joints. Similarly, for aircraft deployed in very wet places, the plywood would expand (or even rot), again compromising the safety of the aircraft.

Aluminum doesn't suffer from these defects; in fact, it's incredibly resistant to corrosion and, as such, formed the basis of aircraft structures for the next fifty years. But it is by no means perfect—it isn't stiff enough or strong enough by weight to create truly lightweight, fuel-efficient aircraft. So even when aluminum aircraft production was at its height, a generation of engineers kept scratching their heads, wondering what the ideal material for the skin of an airplane might be— another metal, or something else entirely? Carbon fiber looked promising since it was ten times stiffer by weight than steel, aluminum, or plywood. But carbon fiber is a textile, and at the time, no one could make a plane wing out of it.

The answer, it turned out, was epoxy glue. Epoxies are another two-part adhesive formulation, but at their core is always a single molecule called an epoxide.

The ring of an epoxide molecule being opened up by a hardener, allowing it to form a polymer glue.

There is a ring at the center of the epoxide molecule, with two carbon atoms connected to one oxygen atom. Breaking these bonds opens up the ring, allowing the epoxide to react with other molecules to create a strong solid. The hardening reaction won't start until the ring is opened up by breaking the carbon-oxygen bonds, and this is typically done by adding a「hardener.」

One of the major advantages of epoxies is that the reaction is temperature-dependent; you can mix it up and it won't start bonding until you want it to. This is critical to the production of the complex-shaped, fiber-reinforced parts that make up an airplane wing; the parts are all enormous and require weeks to manufacture. When you are finally ready to transform the glue into a strong solid, you put it into a pressure oven, heat the wing up to the right temperature, and presto.

These ovens are called autoclaves, and they can be the size of aircraft. All air is removed from the aircraft molds before they are heated up, solving another problem related to glues—air often becomes trapped inside a bond, forming a bubble that, once it has hardened, becomes a weak spot. Another major advantage of epoxides is that they are chemically very versatile. Chemists can attach different components to the epoxide ring, which allows it to bond to different materials, such as metals, ceramics, and, yes, carbon fiber.

You may be wondering why the epoxy resins sold in hardware stores don't need to be heated and autoclaved before you can use them to repair broken crockery or glue the knob back onto the metal lid of your juicer. These epoxies have chemical hardeners different from the ones used to make aircraft, and they've been designed to react with the epoxide molecule at room temperature. The glue is sold in two containers, which you have to mix together. One tube holds the epoxide resin and the other tube contains a hardener and various accelerators that speed up the reaction, allowing the glue to become solid faster. These domestic epoxies are not as strong as the aerospace versions, but they are still very powerful.

Maybe this all sounds easy, but it took decades to develop the fundamental understanding and technology of composite structures to the point where everyone would trust these carbon fiber planes in flight. First, carbon fiber composites were tested on the ground in racing cars and proved to be highly successful. Racing cars even have carbon parts in their engines now, and, yes, you guessed it, we've designed epoxies that can be used in that high-temperature environment. After racing cars, carbon fiber composites were applied to prosthetics, a great innovation because they are stiffer and stronger than many metals, and a great deal lighter too. The「blades」you see being used by runners with disabilities are made of carbon fiber composites. The material has also been used to make bicycles, and to this day the highest-performing bikes in the world are made of carbon fiber composites glued together using epoxies. And of course, the latest commercial passenger aircraft from Boeing and Airbus are made from carbon fiber composites—including the one that was currently taking me on this transatlantic journey.

Just as bolts and rivets have given way to glues and adhesives in prosthetics and aerospace, it feels highly likely that stitches and screws will give way to glues in hospitals. When I cut my head open playing soccer recently, I went to the emergency room with a bloody handkerchief pressed to my head and sat for two hours in the waiting room. I was finally called in to be seen by a doctor, who cleaned the wound and then produced a tube of cyanoacrylate adhesive. He squirted this on both sides of my wound, held the sides together for ten seconds, and sent me home. This wasn't just some crank doctor trying to save time; this treatment has become standard practice in hospitals.

A water molecule opening up a cyanoacrylate molecule to create a polymer glue.

Cyanoacrylate glue is best known as superglue, and it is a very odd liquid. On its own, the liquid is an oil, and behaves like one. But if exposed to water, the H 2 O molecules react with the cyanoacrylate. This opens up the double bond that holds it together, making it available to react with another cyanoacrylate molecule. This creates a double molecule with an extra chemical bond ready to react with something else. And so it does, reacting with still another cyanoacrylate molecule, creating a triple molecule with another extra bond, and then that reacts too, and so on and so on. As this chain reaction continues, a longer and more interlinked molecule is produced. This is already clever, but it gets even more so when you realize that a thin layer of cyanoacrylate liquid needs only the water vapor that's already in air to be transformed into a solid. While many glues don't adhere in a wet environment because all the water makes it impossible for them to stick to a surface, superglue works anywhere. Conversely, as anyone who's had a run-in with it knows, it makes it stupidly easy to glue your fingers together, which is why chemists are on the hunt for a way to unstick superglue quickly and comfortably.

Fingers aside, glues are holding together a lot of the world these days, and it's quite likely there's more of this ahead because, as the aircraft I was sitting in was amply demonstrating by withstand ing turbulence at five hundred miles per hour, glues are up to it. We probably haven't even scratched the surface of what glues can do, especially when you consider just how many strong, sticky substances other living organisms are using. Hardly a day goes by without some scientist discovering a new glue used by plants, shellfish, or spiders.

I pondered this as I flicked through the movies available on the in-flight entertainment and hesitated when I saw Spider-Man.  Yes, stickiness really is a superpower, I thought, and pressed play.

5 / Fantastic

I LOWERED THE WINDOW shade, shutting out the bright sunshine. This always seems such a perverse thing to do; barely a day goes by in my normal life when I don't dream of jumping through the gray clouds that perpetually hang over London to bask in the sunshine above. But having been in the sky for a while, I wanted to watch a movie and I needed it to be dark so I could see the screen properly. My neighbor, Susan, looked up sharply when I closed the shade: it affected her too. So I raised the shade a tiny bit, letting some bright shafts of light back in, and made the thumbs-up gesture, asking if it was OK to put the shade down; she nodded her consent, clicked on her overhead light, and buried herself back in her book. I felt like I'd annoyed her.

If only a screen could be more like a painting, I thought, a painting made of pigments that could change, allowing characters on the canvas to move as they would in a film. Then I wouldn't have to lower the shade at all. But no sooner had this thought entered my head than I realized that the very book Susan was reading, The Picture of Dorian Gray, was about a painting exactly like that. This was a bit uncanny, and in keeping with the book's spooky plot. Oscar Wilde wrote the novel in 1890, just as liquid crystals were first being discovered; he couldn't have known that they would give rise to the flat-screen technology I was using to watch Spider-Man— nor could he have known that liquid crystals were the very technology capable of creating the magical but sinister painting at the heart of his novel.

In the book, the eponymous Dorian Gray, a good-looking, rich young man, has his portrait painted. When Dorian sees the finished work, he's stung by the thought that he will age and become less beautiful, but the painting will not. He complains:

It will never be older than this particular day of June . . . If it were only the other way! If it were I who was to be always young, and the picture that was to grow old! For that—for that—I would give everything! Yes, there is nothing in the whole world I would not give! I would give my soul for that!

An illustration of the moment when Dorian Gray first sees his youthful portrait.

Dorian's wish is mysteriously granted. He pursues a hedonistic life, in love with his own beauty, youth, and the sensual pleasures they bring him, destroying the lives of others as he does so. The painting, in effect, gives him superpowers, though different from those of Spider-Man, who was now leaping across my screen. Spider-Man has super strength, the ability to cling to buildings, and a「spider-sense」that allows him to detect danger. Dorian Gray's superpower is that he never ages or becomes less beautiful; it is his picture that ages in his place. My eyes flicked across to Susan—who was now in darkness, reading The Picture of Dorian Gray in a pool of overhead light—and it got me thinking how hard it would be to create a moving portrait.

When you dab paint on a canvas, the liquid sticks to it, and to any other layers of paint you've already put down—just as our early ancestors learned in making their cave paintings, paint is effectively a colored glue. Thus, a paint's job is to turn from a liquid into a solid and then stay in place permanently. Different paints achieve this in different ways. Watercolor paint does it by drying, releasing water into the air through evaporation and leaving only the pigments on the page. Oil paint is made of oils—usually poppy, nut, or linseed oils. It doesn't dry. Instead, it has another trick up its sleeve: it reacts with oxygen in the air. Normally, this type of reaction is to be avoided, because oxidation turns butter and cooking oils, for example, rancid and bitter-tasting. But in the case of oil paint it is an advantage. Oils are composed of long hydrocarbon-chain molecules. The oxygen grabs a carbon atom from one chain and joins it to another through a reaction, in the process opening that molecule to further reactions. In other words, oxygen acts as a hardener (just as water acts as a hardener in superglue)—and yes, this is yet another polymerization reaction.

This reaction is extremely useful because it produces a hard, waterproof finish of plastic on the canvas (oil painting could more accurately be referred to as plastic painting); it's incredibly resilient and holds up very well with age. The polymerization takes time, though, since oxygen has to diffuse through the top, hard layers of paint before it can get to the unreacted oil underneath. This is the downside of oil paint—you have to wait a long time for it to harden. But the great masters of oil painting, like Van Eyck, Vermeer, and Titian, used this to their advantage. They overlaid many thin layers of oil paint, which one by one chemically reacted with oxygen and hardened, building up a number of layers of semi-transparent plastic, one on top of another, a complex encasing of many differently colored pigments.

Layering paint gradually like this allows the artist to create wonderfully nuanced work because when the light hits the canvas, it doesn't just bounce off the top layer—some of it penetrates through to the layers below, interacting with the pigments deep in the painting and rebounding as colored light. Or, alternatively, it is fully absorbed by the different layers and thus produces deep blacks. It's a sophisticated way of controlling color, luminosity, and texture, which is exactly why the Renaissance artists adopted oil paint. Analysis of Titian's painting Resurrection reveals nine layers of oil paint, all working to create complex visual effects. It's exactly the intricate expressiveness of oil paint that made Renaissance art so sensual and passionate. The effect of layering is so powerful that it has transcended its roots in painting with oils and is now incorporated into all professional digital illustration tools. If you use Photoshop, or Illustrator, or any other computer graphics tools, you'll be making images in layers.

Linseed oil is also used for many applications beyond oil paint, such as treating wood, to create a transparent, protective plastic barrier—just as oil paint does, but this time, without color. Cricket bats are just one of many wooden objects traditionally given an outer coating using linseed oil. You can also go whole hog and use linseed oil to make a solid material called linoleum, again through a polymerization reaction. Linoleum, a plastic, has been used by designers and interior decorators as a waterproof floor covering. Artists use linoleum too. They carve images into it just as they do with woodcuts, to create prints. Here again, layers are the primary way of building up complexity in the final work.

A lino print, The Secret Lemonade Drinker, by Ruby Wright.

As visually absorbing as they are, neither printmaking nor oil painting will give you a moving image. But if you take a carbon-based molecule, one not so different from those found in linseed oil, such as 4-cyano-4'-pentylbiphenyl, suddenly a moving image becomes possible.

The molecular structure of 4-cyano-4'-pentylbiphenyl, commonly used in liquid crystals.

The main body of a 4-cyano-4'-pentylbiphenyl molecule is made up of two hexagonal rings. This gives it a rigid structure, but the electrons binding it together are not evenly distributed: it is a polar molecule. There are areas concentrated in negative electrical charge and some concentrated in positive electrical charge. The positive charges on one molecule attract the negative charges on another, increasing the tendency of molecules to align with one another in an organized structure—a crystal. But the tail of 4-cyano-4'-pentylbiphenyl has a CH3 group on it, one that's flexible and wriggles, acting in opposition to the formation of a crystal. Hence, 4-cyano-4'-pentylbiphenyl structures are partly organized and partly fluid—a so-called liquid crystal.

Above a temperature of 95ºF, the influence of the CH3 tail wins, and 4-cyano-4'-pentylbiphenyl behaves like a normal transparent oil. But cool it down to room temperature, and the liquid becomes milky in appearance. It's not solid at this temperature, but something odd has happened to it. The molecules have begun to align with one another in much the same way that fish align when they're part of a shoal. It's very unusual for liquids to have a structure like this. One of the definitive qualities of a liquid is that its atoms and molecules have too much energy to stay in one place for any length of time, and so they are constantly rotating, vibrating, and migrating. But liquid crystals are different—the molecules are still dynamic, and can flow, but they keep aligned in their orientation, which has been compared to the regular alignment of atoms in a crystal—hence the name.

An illustration of the difference in structure among a crystal, a liquid crystal, and a liquid.

The alignment isn't perfect, though; because the molecules are in a liquid state, they keep moving around, swapping places, and joining other shoals. But the polar molecules give the liquid crystal another useful property—they respond to applied electric fields. They do so by changing their direction of alignment. Thus, you can get a whole shoal to point in a particular direction by applying a voltage. This turns out to be key to the technological suc cess of liquid crystals; it's what allows them to be integrated into electronic devices.

When light travels through a liquid crystal, subtle changes occur; the polarization changes. To make sense of this, think about light as a wave: a wave of oscillating electric and magnetic fields. But which direction do they oscillate in? Up and down, side to side, or left and right? Standard light from the sun oscillates in all of these directions. But if it bounces off a smooth surface, the surface will encourage the oscillations to move in certain directions and suppress others, depending on which ones it's aligned with. Thus, the rebounding light will contain some oscillations and not others. This is called polarized light.

It's not just surfaces that do this to light. Some transparent materials will change the polarization of light too; polarized sunglasses, for instance. The lenses of polarized sunglasses let only one direction of oscillation through. This obviously reduces the intensity of the light reaching your eyes, which is why you see the world as darker. They're especially useful at the beach, not just because they shade your eyes, but because the glare coming off the surface of a smooth sea is also polarized, and the lenses are designed to block it out. Fishermen use polarized sunglasses to help them see underwater more easily, and photographers use polarized lenses for the same reason—to cut the glare.

Some spiders can detect polarized light, and I wondered if this could be part of Spider-Man's ability to react quickly to danger, his so-called「spider-sense.」In the film, he'd just narrowly escaped being captured by Dr. Octopus with an uncanny, split-second decision that allowed him to evade the villain's tentacles. The special effects were amazing, and I grinned at Susan, forgetting that despite my interest in her book, she may not have a reciprocal interest in Spider-Man.

Liquid crystals change the polarization of light—that's how the image of Spider-Man was being conjured up in the screen in front of me. If you put a lens from your polarized sunglasses on the surface of a liquid crystal, the light coming out of the liquid crystal will appear bright if its polarization is aligned with the lens, but otherwise it will appear dark. But here is the neat trick: if you switch the structure of the liquid crystal using an electric field, the polarization of the liquid crystal also changes. So, at the flick of a switch, you can turn the light on and off. Suddenly, you have a device that is capable of giving out white light, and then none, and then going back to white again, as fast as you can electronically switch the liquid-crystal structure—the makings of a black-and-white screen.

It may sound simple, but it took decades to achieve. It was an Austrian botanist by the name of Friedrich Reinitzer who first categorized the weird behavior of liquid crystals in 1888, just two years before Oscar Wilde wrote The Picture of Dorian Gray. While many scientists studied them over the course of the next eighty years, no one could really find a use for them. It wasn't until 1972, when the Hamilton Watch Company launched the first digital watch, called the Pulsar Time Computer, that liquid crystals found their moment. The watch looked great, unlike any other watch that had come before it, and it cost more than the average car. People who bought it thought they were buying the future—and they were right. Digital technology was coming, and this was the first mass-market entry in what would become a trillion-dollar industry.

The Pulsar Time Computer was made with light-emitting diodes—LEDs—which were themselves made from semiconductor crystals that emit red light in response to an electric current. They looked great, especially on a black background, and the rich and famous went crazy for them—even James Bond wore one in the 1973 film Live and Let Die. The drawback of LEDs at that time, though, was their high energy consumption; the batteries in those first digital watches had very short lives. In order to satisfy the sensational demand for the new digital watches, a more energy-efficient screen technology was needed. Suddenly, after decades as a lab curiosity, liquid crystals had their moment. They quickly dominated the digital-watch market because the electric power required to switch a liquid-crystal pixel from white to black is absolutely minuscule. They were cheap too—so cheap that manufacturers started making the whole display screen out of liquid crystal—this is the gray screen you see on a digital watch. The watch electronically switches certain areas of the gray liquid crystal to block polarized light, which creates black. This allows the watch to show changing numbers, so you can view the time, or date, or anything else that can be conveyed in this small digital format.

A Casio calculator watch.

One of my strongest memories from childhood is the insane jealousy I felt when my friend Merul Patel came back to school after the holidays with the new Casio digital watch and calculator. I was ridiculously impressed as he nonchalantly pressed the tiny little buttons, which beeped happily at him. Of course, I see now it's kind of dumb—who really wants a tiny calculator? But still, at the time, I was completely captivated. It was the beginning of my addiction to gadgets.

Even though digital watches have lost their cool, they've been replaced by a seemingly never-ending parade of other digital devices, not least of which is the cellphone, which still uses liquid- crystal displays. It may seem surprising, but the same basic technology used in a digital watch also yielded the modern smartphone screen, capable of displaying color video. This brings us right back to oil paintings, and the puzzle of creating the moving painting depicted in the novel The Picture of Dorian Gray. Liquid crystals could perhaps be just what's needed—but how do they create color?

We all know that if you take yellow paint and mix it with blue, our eyes interpret that mixture as green. Similarly, if you take red paint and add blue, you get purple. Color theory shows that you can make any particular color by mixing together combinations of primary colors. In the printing industry, cyan (C), magenta (M), and yellow (Y) are generally used, with the addition of black (K) liquid to control contrast. This is also how inkjet printers work and why you see the abbreviation CMYK on printer cartridges. These colors are printed onto the page, dot by dot, and it's our eyes and visual system that integrate them. We've known for a long time that the eye can be fooled in this way; Newton took note of this manipulation in the seventeenth century. In the nineteenth century it formed the basis of a painting technique—pointillism. Blobs of pigments placed close together remained physically unmixed, so their brightness and luminosity could be controlled to create the effect the artist wanted. As predicted by color theory, it's possible to make any color by mixing paints this way, as long as the dots are small and placed close together. But changing a particular color once you've made the dots is another story. You'd have to physically change the ratios of the pigments on the canvas. Which means you would have to remove some dots and add others. Unless, of course, you found a way to put down dots with every possible combination of colors.

This is essentially how liquid-crystal color displays work, whether they're on your phone, your TV, or, as in my case, encased in the back of the seat in front of me on the plane. We call the dots pixels. Each pixel has three colored filters that let three primary colors through. For displays these are red (R), green (G), and blue (B)—hence the abbreviation RGB. If they are all emitted equally, then the pixel appears white, even though it's made up of three separate colors. You can see this for yourself if you put a small drop of water on your phone and look through it onto the screen. The water behaves as a magnifying glass, which allows you to see the sets of red, green, and blue.

Just as the masters of oil painting had to work out how to bring darkness and shadow into their work by mixing colors and inventing a color theory for perception, so are today's liquid-crystal-display engineers and scientists pushing the boundaries of color display with moving images. And just as in the Renaissance, when oil painting battled it out with other techniques and mediums, such as fresco and egg tempera, so these days do liquid-crystal displays (LCDs) compete with organic light-emitting diodes (OLEDs). This battle, which is currently being played out in every new generation of TVs, tablets, and smartphones, has its own arcane language. LCDs, you might be told by an online blog, can't show deep blacks because the polarizers that keep light from coming through during a dark scene in a movie aren't 100 percent effective; you end up with grays. Similarly, because of the way color is created in LCDs, the absolute brightness of some hues suffers. Hence the issue with the window shade in the airplane cabin, and not wanting to have sunlight reflecting off the screen.

Nevertheless, the displays have got better and better, thanks to great innovations that ultimately aren't so different from layering oil paint. For example, the addition of an active-matrix layer allows some of the pixels to be switched independently from others. Thus, some parts of the image can be given higher contrast than others—instead of having to set the contrast for the whole image. This is useful for scenes of a movie that are partially lit. It is all done automatically, of course, with transistor technology—that's what the「active」means in「active matrix.」Engineers have also learned to improve the way the image changes, so that you can see it well from almost any viewing angle. It used to be that the screen couldn't be seen well from certain angles, but now a「diffuser layer」has been incorporated, which spreads the light out as it leaves the screen. In comparison, the technology of OLEDs, which are the successors of the red-light-emitting diodes of the original digital watch, the Pulsar Time Computer, are now energy-efficient. They also have a much larger palette of colors and near-perfect viewing angles. But despite being much more expensive than LCDs, they're still not yet as bright.

LCDs may not be perfect, but they are essentially the dynamic canvas that Oscar Wilde dreamed of. It's now possible to have a portrait of yourself on display in your hall (or your attic) that updates daily. When liquid-crystal displays became really cheap a few years ago, people started giving them to one another as presents, in the form of dynamic photo frames. But these didn't become that popular. In fact, people hated them, just as Dorian Gray loathed his dynamic portrait. I'm convinced it wasn't the quality of the image that repelled them—plenty of people love looking at themselves on their liquid-crystal smartphone display—but rather something about the very nature of these displays. They're impostors, something fluid, magical, and dreamlike pretending to be a solid, dependable, real photograph of a moment frozen in time.

When applied to television in the form of flat-panel TVs, that same technology has been hugely popular. Switching the color of the pixels in a coordinated manner allows TV screens to display moving pictures. They're why we can see actors talking, gesturing, and making different facial expressions, and, in the case of the movie I was watching, leaping from building to building, saving the world from evil. Even though I knew what I was watching wasn't real, that it was just a collection of primary-color pixels flashing along to an accompanying soundtrack, it still stimulated me, both intellectually and emotionally, completely drawing me into the story. But here is the thing I find really difficult to understand. If I compare the experience of watching this film on a plane with standing in an art gallery viewing a masterpiece, such as Titian's Resurrection, I know which one is more likely to move me. It's the film, I'm afraid. I'm not proud of this. I know that Titian's paintings are great art and superhero movies played on a ten-inch display are not. Why am I so shallow? Could it be that at forty thousand feet I lose all taste in art? Or is it something to do with the heightened emotional state experienced while flying?

Static images like paintings and photographs allow us to contemplate ourselves, and how much we've changed from viewing to viewing. As we revisit great works of art, be they by Titian, Van Gogh, or Frida Kahlo, over our lifetime we can trace our reactions to them. The images may remain the same, but our sense of what they mean changes as we change. The magical liquid screens on airplanes act in the opposite manner; they are dynamic and offer us a vivid window into another world. They let us escape ourselves. Flying above the clouds, in a darkened cabin, we enter a fantasy. We can act, for a little while, like gods, looking down on the deeds of humans through our liquid portals, observing them, laughing at their foolishness, shaking our heads at their crazy ways. In doing so, our emotions are heightened. Some academic research suggests that this is due to the extreme contrast between experiencing a feeling of warm intimacy toward the characters depicted in the film, and the stark reality of sitting next to strangers in a tube while flying at four thousand feet in the air. This certainly rings true for me. I only ever cry when watching films on planes; small tears well up at even the most schmaltzy of movies, and I laugh uproariously at comedies that, on the ground, would hardly raise a smile.

By the time my film had ended, Spider-Man was victorious, but there was no record of any of the scenes I'd watched in the actual liquid crystals. They'd gone blank, ready to take on another dream. I felt less godlike. I looked over at Susan, who'd wrapped herself in a blanket and was sleeping, curled up in a position that looked comfortable, although I knew from experience that it wasn't. I was tempted to open the window shade and feast my eyes on the sunny blue skies again, but I didn't want to risk waking Susan. I wondered if I was sleepy at all, and thought I'd have a try at nodding off. I removed my shoes, reclined my seat, and tried to forget how hard it usually is for me to fall asleep on an airplane.

