# 0401. Sticky

IT DOESN'T MATTER HOW many times I experience turbulence on a plane; I can never seem to stop the seeds of panic forming in my brain. Rationally, I knew the wings weren't going to snap — we were flying in one of the most technologically advanced passenger aircraft ever made. I've even visited the factory where the wings are glued together and seen them being mechanically tested. But despite this, the rational part of my brain was being ignored by my panicking neurons. I know I'm not alone in this. Over the years, I've learned not to talk about the aircraft being glued together to other passengers; they generally don't find that reassuring.

Many liquids are sticky — that is, they will stick to you if you put your finger in them. Oil sticks to us, water sticks to us, soup sticks to us, honey sticks to us. Thankfully, they stick to other things better than to us, which is why towels work. When you have a shower, water trickles down your body, sticking to your skin instead of bouncing off, allowing it to follow the curves of your chest, belly, and bum in defiance of gravity. This stickiness is due to the low surface tension between the water and your skin. When the water comes in contact with the fibers of a towel, they act as little tiny wicks — just as candle wicks suck up liquid wax — so the micro-wicks of the towel suck the water off your body. Hence, your skin gets dry, and the towel gets wet. The stickiness of liquids, then, is not a property intrinsic to any particular liquid. It is determined by how liquids interact with a particular material.

However, just because something is sticky doesn't mean it can be used to glue an aircraft together. Wet your finger and dab it on a speck of dust, and it will stick to you, and remain sticking to you until the water evaporates. That water loses its stickiness when it evaporates is why, although it is sticky, it can't be considered a glue. Glues start off as liquid and then, generally speaking, turn into a solid, creating a permanent bond.

This is a materials process that humans have been playing with for a very long time. Our prehistoric ancestors made pigments from the powder of charcoal or naturally occurring colored rocks like red ocher, and used them to draw pictures on the walls of caves. To get the pigments to stick to the walls, they mixed them with sticky things like fats, wax, and egg, and so invented paints. Paints are essentially colored glues, and these earliest ones were permanent enough to last for thousands of years. Some of the oldest cave paintings still in existence are in the Lascaux caves in France, estimated to be about twenty thousand years old.

An ancient charcoal-and-ocher cave painting of Megaloceros, an extinct genus of deer.

Tribal cultures have long used these colored sticky substances as face paints, a central part of both sacred rituals and warfare. The tradition continues today with the modern cosmetics industry. Lipstick, for instance, is made up of pigments mixed with oils and fats that allow the color to stick to your lips — hence the name. Getting the glue to stick to your lips for hours, but still be easy enough to remove at the end of the day, has always been an issue; ditto for eyeliner and any other kind of makeup. The problem illustrates one of the main themes in glue design — namely, that unsticking is often as important as sticking. But more on that later — mastering sticking is hard enough for now. If you want to stick something together that needs mechanical strength, like the components of an ax, a boat, or indeed an airplane, then you need something stronger than paint or lipstick.

In the summer of 1991, two German tourists discovered the mummified remains of a man while walking in the Italian Alps. He turned out to be five thousand years old and was later nicknamed Ötzi. His remains were extremely well preserved because they'd been encased in ice since his death, as were his clothes and tools: he wore a cloak made of woven grass, and a coat, a belt, leggings, a loincloth, and shoes, all made of leather. All of his tools were ingeniously designed, but with respect to glue, it's Ötzi's ax that's the most interesting. Made of yew wood, with a copper blade, the ax was bound together with leather straps stuck on with a birch resin. This gummy substance is produced by heating up birch bark in a pot, yielding a brownish-black goo that was widely used as an adhesive in the late Paleolithic and Mesolithic periods. It works for making heavy tools like an ax because when it cools, it forms a tough solid. Our ancestors used it to attach an arrowhead to a shaft, to make flint knives, to repair pottery, and to make boats. The liquid is mostly made from a family of molecules called phenols.

The molecular structure of 2-methoxy-4-methylphenol, which is one of the constituents of birch-bark glue. The hexagon of carbon and hydrogen atoms joined to an –OH hydroxyl group is the hallmark of a phenol.

The chemical name may be unfamiliar, but I'm sure you would recognize the smell: the major phenol in birch-bark glue is 2-methoxy-4-methylphenol, which smells of smoky creosote. Phenol aldehyde smells of vanilla. Ethyl phenol smells of smoky bacon; indeed, whenever you smoke fish or meat, it's the phenols that give it that distinctive flavor.

When you heat up the birch bark, you extract the phenols. The thick resin that's produced is basically a mixture of a solvent called turpentine and phenols. The turpentine is the base of the liquid, but over the course of a few weeks the turpentine evaporates. This leaves just the phenol mixture, which turns from a liquid into a hard tar sticky enough to bond wood to leather and other materials.

As it turns out, trees are excellent purveyors of sticky things. Pine trees exude nodules of resin that also make good glues. An adhesive popular for a thousand years, gum arabic, comes from the acacia gum tree. The resin of trees of the genus Boswellia is a particularly nice-smelling glue called frankincense. Myrrh, another aromatic resin, comes from a thorny tree of the genus Commiphora . Resins were often used in medicines as well as in perfumes, perhaps because their active chemical components, like phenols, had potent antibacterial properties. Frankincense and myrrh were so highly valued in antiquity that they were given as presents to queens, kings, and emperors, which is why their presence in the Christian nativity story is so significant.

The stickiness of tree resins is no accident. They evolved to be sticky so they could trap insects, and therefore provide a valuable form of defense for the trees. The gemstone amber is actually fossilized tree resin, and often there are insects and bits of debris trapped inside it, perfectly preserved.

An ant trapped in amber, a fossilized tree resin.

Without tree resins, it would have been very hard for our earliest ancestors to make tools and equipment, and so for our civilization to get off the ground. Nevertheless, you wouldn't want to glue an airplane together with them — they would certainly crack during flight. Phenol molecules don't bond very strongly to other substances — the molecule itself is too self-contained, too happy with sticking to itself.

But once you're in the trees, you don't need to look very far for stronger glues. Consider birds: their wings are not bolted or screwed together. Their muscles and ligaments and skin are bonded via families of molecules called proteins. Our bodies are joined together with them too. One of the most important of these proteins is called collagen. It is common to all animals and relatively easy to extract. Early humans used skins of fish and hides of wild game — they separated the fat and then boiled the skins in water. This extracts the collagen from the animals and creates a thick, clear liquid that turns into a solid, stiff material when it cools: gelatin.

The collagen proteins in gelatin are long molecules made from a carbon-and-nitrogen backbone. In animals, collagen molecules stick together to create strong fibrils that make up tendons, skin, muscles, and cartilage. But once they've reacted with hot water in the glue-making process, the collagen molecules separate. They now have chemical bonds to spare, which they want to satisfy. In other words, they want to stick to something else — they've become the animal glue gelatin.

How the structure of collagen fibril is transformed to become the animal glue gelatin.

It was animal glues that replaced wood resins as the mainstay of early human technologies. The Egyptians, for instance, used animal glue to make furniture and decorative inlays. In fact, it appears that the Egyptians were the first people to use glue to get around one of the main mechanical problems of working with wood — that it has a grain.

The density and arrangement of the cellulose fibers in wood give it its grain, which is determined not just by the biology of trees but also their growth environment. Thus the grain varies from species to species and from tree to tree. The upshot: wood is strong across the grain but has a tendency to crack along the grain. This is not a big deal if you are splitting logs for a fire, but if you are building a house, a chair, a violin, an airplane, or pretty much anything out of wood, it presents a design problem. The thinner the piece of wood, the more likely that it will crack. Counterintuitively, the solution to this problem is to cut the wood into even thinner pieces, called veneer.

The Egyptians were the first to make veneer. They stuck thin pieces of it on top of one another, so that the grain of each layer was perpendicular to the one above. This structure didn't tend to crack in any direction: we now call it plywood. The Egyptians used animal glues to stick the plywood together, and that worked reasonably well. But if you've ever cooked with gelatin, you know that animal glue dissolves in hot water. Unless kept absolutely dry, fur niture made with animal glues falls apart. This seems like a huge defect, but Egypt is and was a very dry place, and so they managed.

And as mentioned earlier, there are in fact distinct advantages to a glue that can be unstuck. Historically, the designers of classic musical instruments, like Antonio Stradivari, known as the greatest violin maker of all time, used animal glue to construct their instruments. This would have allowed Stradivari to unstick any faulty joints during production, and so build almost perfect instruments. Today, in order to repair a wooden instrument, craftspeople unstick the joints with steam. This causes the bond between the glue and the wood to weaken and then dissolve. Thus, the wood comes away undamaged and clean, extending the life of the instrument and increasing its value. Indeed, most people who work in furniture restoration use animal glues precisely because they can be easily unstuck by using heat.

But when it comes to making wings, heat can be a real problem, or at least that's what legend tells us. Just look at what happened to the mythical king Minos, who ruled the Mediterranean island of Crete. The sea god Poseidon gave the king a very beautiful snow-white bull. King Minos was instructed to sacrifice the bull to honor Poseidon, but he sacrificed a different one instead because he did not want to kill the more beautiful bull. To punish him, Poseidon made King Minos's wife fall in love with the bull, and the offspring of that union was a creature that was half man and half bull — a Minotaur. This Minotaur grew up to be a terrifying beast that ate humans, and so King Minos got his master craftsman Daedalus to construct a prison for the Minotaur, in the form of an elaborate maze called the Labyrinth. To prevent Daedalus from telling others about the secrets within this structure, King Minos imprisoned him in a tower, along with his young son, Icarus. Daedalus, though, was a hard man to contain. He constructed wings by gluing feathers together with wax: one pair for himself and one for Icarus. On the day of their escape Daedalus warned his son not to fly too close to the sun. But during their flight Icarus was so exhilarated that he began to soar higher and higher. The wax melted, the feathers came unstuck, and Icarus fell to his death.

The fall of Icarus, which perpetuates the myth that he fell because the wax holding his wings together melted.

If you are wondering whether a modern aircraft could come unglued as it flies higher and higher, I should point out that the myth of Icarus defies logic. By flying higher, Icarus would have experienced colder, not hotter, temperatures. Temperature decreases by 1.8ºF for every thousand feet of altitude you gain because the atmosphere is cooled by the radiation of heat into space. At forty thousand feet, the altitude my plane was flying at, the temperature outside my window was approximately –60ºF, a temperature at which all waxes remain solid.

I should also say at this point that modern aircraft are not glued together with wax — nowadays we have much better glues. The intellectual journey of how they were discovered starts with rubber. Rubber is, of course, another sticky tree product. It's extracted by tapping the bark of the Pará rubber tree, which is indigenous to South and Central America. Mesoamerican cultures made many things with it, including the bouncing balls they used in ritualistic games. When European explorers reached the continent in the sixteenth century, they were amazed by rubber. They had never seen anything like it: it has the softness and pliability of leather, but is far more elastic and completely resistant to water. But despite its obvious value, no one in Europe could find an immediate economically viable use for it. Then the British scientist Joseph Priestley found that it was good for rubbing pencil marks off paper — which is how rubber got its name.

Natural rubber consists of thousands of small isoprene molecules bonded together in a long chain. This molecular trick of linking together units of the same chemical to make a completely different one is common in nature. These types of molecules are called polymers —  poly , meaning「many,」and mer, meaning「unit.」Isoprene is the mer in natural rubber. The long polyisoprene chains in rubber are all jumbled up like spaghetti. The bonds within each chain are weak, which is why there is not much resistance if you pull rubber: the chains just unravel. This is what makes rubber so stretchy.

The structure of natural rubber, which consists of a jumble of long polyisoprene molecules.

It's rubber's stretchiness that makes it so sticky. It can be molded easily and wedged into any space, including the crevices in your hand; this stretchiness makes it grippy. Therefore rubber is the perfect covering for the handlebars of a bicycle: it prevents your hands from accidentally slipping off, but you don't need to worry about getting stuck to the bike forever. The same goes for making car tires — rubber lets the car adhere to the road strongly enough to create the friction needed to move the wheels forward, but not so strongly that the car gets stuck to the road permanently.

One little-known but especially ingenious use of rubber is on Post-it notes. Post-its have an adhesive layer of rubber that remains stuck to the notes when you pull them from their pad, so they can be attached to walls, tables, computer monitors, books, and more, without damaging these surfaces or leaving a mark. The microscopic spheres of rubber that make up the glue on the Post-it bond strongly to the note itself, but when pressed onto a surface, they create only a small adhesive force. Which is why, when you pull the Post-it off whatever it's stuck to, the rubber stays put on the paper. Thus, the Post-it is repositionable and reusable. Genius? Well, actually, this not-very-sticky glue was in fact an accidental invention. In 1968 Dr. Spencer Silver, a chemist with the 3M Company, stumbled upon it while he was trying to make a super-strong adhesive.

Many other culture-changing adhesive products emerged in the twentieth century. One of the most important was sticky tape, invented in 1925 by another 3M Company inventor, Richard Drew. Drew's tape is composed of three key layers. The middle layer is made of cellophane, a plastic made from wood pulp that gives the tape its mechanical strength and transparency. The bottom layer is an adhesive, and the top layer — the crucial layer — is a nonstick material such as Teflon, which has a high surface tension with most other materials and so cannot be easily wetted by them (which is why we use it in nonstick pans). Its use in tape really is genius; it means the tape can be placed on top of itself without permanently sticking to itself, allowing it to be manufactured as a roll. And a roll of tape — well, what home is complete without one? — or ten, in my case.

You can tell a lot about someone from how they handle a roll of sticky tape. I have to admit straightaway that I'm a tearer, not a cutter. Ask me for a bit of tape, and I'll grab the roll and enthusiastically try to rip off a piece for you. I probably won't get it right the first time. Most likely I'll mangle a few pieces first, either tearing them off at a crazy angle or snapping them off clean, and inevitably I will somehow allow the sticky parts to get stuck to one another. I'm not proud of this; it actually sends me into a rage. I get increasingly furious with the tape, which in turn seems to goad me by sticking itself back onto the roll so seamlessly that I can't find the end. At this point I have to resort to running my thumb around the roll, trying to locate the end by feel alone. This sometimes takes so long that I start shouting at the tape. Then I throw it across the room — and wonder why it is that I still don't own a tape dispenser.

Gaffer tape suits my personality better. It's designed to tear without scissors. It's reinforced with fabric that runs across the roll, and makes the easy tear possible. The strength of the tape comes from the fabric's fibers, while the stickiness and flexibility come from the plastic and adhesive layers. I love gaffer tape so much, I confess I envy people with jobs that require them to carry it around with them on their belt. Thinking of this, I snuck a glance at Susan, who was still watching a film, and wondered what kind of tape she might favor. Her book, The Picture of Dorian Gray by Oscar Wilde, was lying on the tray table in front of her. I noticed the spine had been repaired with what looked like red electrical tape. The ends of the tape were clearly cut with scissors: so she was that kind of person.

The sticky tape pioneered by Richard Drew, although a useful invention, is not the technological innovation that led to the modern aircraft. That came from another American chemist, Leo Baekeland, who succeeded in making one of the first plastics. He made his plastic by combining two liquids. The first was based on phenols, the main constituent of birch resin, and the other ingredient was formaldehyde, an embalming fluid. These two liquids react together to produce a new molecule that has a spare bond for more phenols to attach themselves to, which in turn produces bonds for still more reactions with more phenols. Eventually the whole liquid (if you get the proportions right) is chemically locked together into a solid. In other words, the reaction makes one giant molecule, and all the bonds holding it together are permanent, so whatever object you've created will be hard and strong.

Baekeland used this new plastic to create a number of objects such as telephones, which had just been invented. This was, of course, immensely useful and made Baekeland a fortune. But it had another impact. Chemists realized that the phenol and formaldehyde could be mixed and applied to the interface between two things — gluing them together as it hardened. This was the beginning of a whole new family of glues called two-part adhesives, which were stronger than anything that had come before.

How two liquids, phenol and formaldehyde, create a strong adhesive.

The more people used these two-part adhesives, the more they understood just how useful they were. First of all, the different components — phenol and formaldehyde — could be stored in separate containers, and thus remain liquid until they needed to be used. And then, beyond that, you could alter their chemical composition through additives, and make them better or worse at wetting and then sticking to different materials, such as metals or wood.

This new type of glue had a big effect on the world of engineers. They returned to thinking about plywood, first developed in ancient Egypt. If you made plywood using a two-part adhesive perfectly designed to bond with wood, you'd have plywood that was neither held together with the weak bonds of animal glue nor sensitive to water. But for this new plywood to take off, a strong market demand was needed. The simultaneous development of the aircraft industry provided just that. In the early twentieth century, most planes were made of wood, but because of wood's grain, they were liable to crack. Plywood was the perfect solution — it could be molded into aerodynamic shapes and, thanks to the new two-part adhesives, was both reliable and resilient.

The most famous plywood airplane ever built was the de Havilland Mosquito bomber. When it was introduced during World War II, it was the fastest aircraft in the sky. Because it could outrun every other plane, it wasn't even outfitted with defensive machine guns. It remains, to this day, perhaps the most beautiful plywood object ever made. Its elegance and sensuousness come from plywood's ability to be molded into complex shapes while its glues set, a property that made it popular among designers for decades.

A photo of a de Havilland Mosquito bomber, which was made of plywood.

After the war, plywood continued to revolutionize our world — this time with furniture. Two of the most innovative designers at the time were the married couple Charles and Ray Eames, who used plywood to reimagine wooden furniture. Their designs, particularly what is now known as the Eames chair, became classics, and are still made and imitated today. Go into any café or classroom and you are likely to see them. Other fashions in furniture have come and gone, but plywood has retained its appeal.

A plywood chair designed by Charles and Ray Eames.

But while plywood furniture stood the test of time, aeronautical engineering had to move on. After the war, aluminum alloys became the preeminent material for making aircraft, not because they were stronger by weight than plywood, or even stiffer by weight than plywood. No, aluminum won out because it could be more reliably manufactured, pressurized, and certified, especially as planes became bigger and started to fly higher. It's very hard to stop plywood from absorbing water or from drying out. Plywood aircraft that spent a lot of time in arid countries would eventually dry out, causing the material to shrink and putting stress on the glued joints. Similarly, for aircraft deployed in very wet places, the plywood would expand (or even rot), again compromising the safety of the aircraft.

Aluminum doesn't suffer from these defects; in fact, it's incredibly resistant to corrosion and, as such, formed the basis of aircraft structures for the next fifty years. But it is by no means perfect — it isn't stiff enough or strong enough by weight to create truly lightweight, fuel-efficient aircraft. So even when aluminum aircraft production was at its height, a generation of engineers kept scratching their heads, wondering what the ideal material for the skin of an airplane might be —  another metal, or something else entirely? Carbon fiber looked promising since it was ten times stiffer by weight than steel, aluminum, or plywood. But carbon fiber is a textile, and at the time, no one could make a plane wing out of it.

The answer, it turned out, was epoxy glue. Epoxies are another two-part adhesive formulation, but at their core is always a single molecule called an epoxide.

The ring of an epoxide molecule being opened up by a hardener, allowing it to form a polymer glue.

There is a ring at the center of the epoxide molecule, with two carbon atoms connected to one oxygen atom. Breaking these bonds opens up the ring, allowing the epoxide to react with other molecules to create a strong solid. The hardening reaction won't start until the ring is opened up by breaking the carbon-oxygen bonds, and this is typically done by adding a「hardener.」

One of the major advantages of epoxies is that the reaction is temperature-dependent; you can mix it up and it won't start bonding until you want it to. This is critical to the production of the complex-shaped, fiber-reinforced parts that make up an airplane wing; the parts are all enormous and require weeks to manufacture. When you are finally ready to transform the glue into a strong solid, you put it into a pressure oven, heat the wing up to the right temperature, and presto.

These ovens are called autoclaves, and they can be the size of aircraft. All air is removed from the aircraft molds before they are heated up, solving another problem related to glues — air often becomes trapped inside a bond, forming a bubble that, once it has hardened, becomes a weak spot. Another major advantage of epoxides is that they are chemically very versatile. Chemists can attach different components to the epoxide ring, which allows it to bond to different materials, such as metals, ceramics, and, yes, carbon fiber.

You may be wondering why the epoxy resins sold in hardware stores don't need to be heated and autoclaved before you can use them to repair broken crockery or glue the knob back onto the metal lid of your juicer. These epoxies have chemical hardeners different from the ones used to make aircraft, and they've been designed to react with the epoxide molecule at room temperature. The glue is sold in two containers, which you have to mix together. One tube holds the epoxide resin and the other tube contains a hardener and various accelerators that speed up the reaction, allowing the glue to become solid faster. These domestic epoxies are not as strong as the aerospace versions, but they are still very powerful.

Maybe this all sounds easy, but it took decades to develop the fundamental understanding and technology of composite structures to the point where everyone would trust these carbon fiber planes in flight. First, carbon fiber composites were tested on the ground in racing cars and proved to be highly successful. Racing cars even have carbon parts in their engines now, and, yes, you guessed it, we've designed epoxies that can be used in that high-temperature environment. After racing cars, carbon fiber composites were applied to prosthetics, a great innovation because they are stiffer and stronger than many metals, and a great deal lighter too. The「blades」you see being used by runners with disabilities are made of carbon fiber composites. The material has also been used to make bicycles, and to this day the highest-performing bikes in the world are made of carbon fiber composites glued together using epoxies. And of course, the latest commercial passenger aircraft from Boeing and Airbus are made from carbon fiber composites — including the one that was currently taking me on this transatlantic journey.

Just as bolts and rivets have given way to glues and adhesives in prosthetics and aerospace, it feels highly likely that stitches and screws will give way to glues in hospitals. When I cut my head open playing soccer recently, I went to the emergency room with a bloody handkerchief pressed to my head and sat for two hours in the waiting room. I was finally called in to be seen by a doctor, who cleaned the wound and then produced a tube of cyanoacrylate adhesive. He squirted this on both sides of my wound, held the sides together for ten seconds, and sent me home. This wasn't just some crank doctor trying to save time; this treatment has become standard practice in hospitals.

A water molecule opening up a cyanoacrylate molecule to create a polymer glue.

Cyanoacrylate glue is best known as superglue, and it is a very odd liquid. On its own, the liquid is an oil, and behaves like one. But if exposed to water, the H 2 O molecules react with the cyanoacrylate. This opens up the double bond that holds it together, making it available to react with another cyanoacrylate molecule. This creates a double molecule with an extra chemical bond ready to react with something else. And so it does, reacting with still another cyanoacrylate molecule, creating a triple molecule with another extra bond, and then that reacts too, and so on and so on. As this chain reaction continues, a longer and more interlinked molecule is produced. This is already clever, but it gets even more so when you realize that a thin layer of cyanoacrylate liquid needs only the water vapor that's already in air to be transformed into a solid. While many glues don't adhere in a wet environment because all the water makes it impossible for them to stick to a surface, superglue works anywhere. Conversely, as anyone who's had a run-in with it knows, it makes it stupidly easy to glue your fingers together, which is why chemists are on the hunt for a way to unstick superglue quickly and comfortably.

Fingers aside, glues are holding together a lot of the world these days, and it's quite likely there's more of this ahead because, as the aircraft I was sitting in was amply demonstrating by withstand ing turbulence at five hundred miles per hour, glues are up to it. We probably haven't even scratched the surface of what glues can do, especially when you consider just how many strong, sticky substances other living organisms are using. Hardly a day goes by without some scientist discovering a new glue used by plants, shellfish, or spiders.

I pondered this as I flicked through the movies available on the in-flight entertainment and hesitated when I saw Spider-Man.  Yes, stickiness really is a superpower, I thought, and pressed play.