## 参考文献

Aaboe, Asger. Episodes from the Early History of Mathematics. New York: L W. Singer, 1963

Adams, Frederick. The Informational Turn in Philosophy. Minds and Machines

13 (2003):471-501

Allen, William, and Thomas R. H. Thompson. A Narrative of the Expedition to the River

Niger in 1847. London: Richard Bentley, 1848

Archer, Charles Maybury, ed. The London Anecdotes: The Electric Telegraph, vol 1. London: David Bogue, 1848

Archibald, Raymond Clare. Seventeenth Century Calculating Machines. Mathematica

Tables and Other Aids to Computation 1: 1 (1943): 27-28

Aspray, William. " From Mathematical Constructivity to Computer Science: Alan Turing,

John von Neumann, and the Origins of Computer Science in Mathematical Logic. PHD thesis, University of Wisconsin-madison, 1980

The Scientific Conceptualization of Information: A Survey. Annals of the History o1

Computing7, no.2 (1985):117-140

Aunger, Robert, ed. Darwinizing Culture: The Status of Memetics as a Science. Oxford Oxford University Press, 2000

Avery, John. Information Theory and Evolution. Singapore: World Scientific, 2003

Baars, Bernard J. The Cognitive Revolution in Psychology. New York: Guilford Press, 1986

Babbage, Charles. On a Method of Expressing by Signs the Action of Machinery Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London 116 no.3  (1826): 250-265

Reflections on the Decline of Science in England and on Some of Its Causes London: B. Fellowes. 1830

Table of the Logarithms of the Natura/ Numbers, From 7 to 108, 000. London B. Fellowes. 1831

On the Economy of Machinery and Manufactures.4 th ed. London: Charles Knight 1835.

The Ninth Bridgewater Treatise. A Fragment. 2 nd ed. London: John Murray, 1838

Passages from the Life of a Philosopher. London: Longman, Green, Longman, Roberts. &Green. 1864

Charles Babbage and His Calculating Engines: Selected Writings Edited by Philip Morrison and Emily Morrison. New York: Dover Publications, 1961

The Analytical Engine and Mechanical Notation. New York: New York University Press. 1989

The Difference Engine and Table Making. New York: New York University Press, 1989

The Works of Charles Babbage. Edited by Martin Campbell-kelly. New York: New York University Press, 1989

Babbage, Henry Prevost, ed Babbage s Calculating Engines Being a Collection of Papers Relating to Them; Their History and Construction. London: E. &F. NSpon, 1889

Bairstow, Jeff. The Father of the Information Age. Laser Focus World (2002): 114

Baker, Nicholson. The Size of Thoughts: Essays and Other Lumber. New York: Random House, 1996

Ball, W. W. Rouse. A History of the Study of Mathematics at Cambridge. Cambridge Cambridge University Press, 1889

Bar-hillel, Yehoshua. An Examination of Information Theory. Philosophy of Science 22 no.2 (1955):86-105.

Barabasi, Albert-laszlo. Linked: How Everything s Connected to Everything Else ana What It Means for Business, Science, and Everyday Life. New York: Plume, 2003

Barnard, G A. The Theory of Information. Ournal of the Royal Statistical Society, Series B13, no.1 (1951):46-64.

Baron, Sabrina Alcorn, Eric N. Lindquist, and Eleanor F. Shevlin. Agent of Change Prin Culture Studies After Elizabeth L Eisenstein. Amherst: University of Massachusetts Press 2007

Bartlett, C. J. And Calvin G. Green. Clinical Prediction: Does One Sometimes Know Too

Much Journal of Counseling Psychology 13, no.3 (1966): 267-270

Barwise, on. "Information and Circumstance. Notre Dame Journal of Formal Logic 27 no.3 (1986):324-338.

Battel le, John. The Search How Google and Its Rivals Rewrote the Rules of Business ana Transformed Our Culture. New York Portfolio. 2005

Baugh, Albert C. A History of the English Language. 2 nd ed. New York: Appleton-century Crofts, 1957. Baum, Joan. The Calculating Passion of Ada Byron. Hamden, Conn. Shoe String Press, 1986

Belot, Gordon, John Earman, and Laura Ruetsche. The Hawking Information Loss Paradox: The Anatomy of a Controversy. British Journal for the Philosophy of Science 50 (1999):189-229.

Benjamin, Park. A History of Electricit  (the ntellectual Rise in Electricity from Antiquity to the Days of Benjamin Franklin. New York: Wiley and Sons, 1898

Bennett, harles H. On Random and Hard-to-describe Numbers. BM Watson Research

Center Report RC 7483  (1979)

The Thermodynamics of Computationa Review. International ournal o Theoretical Physics 21, no 12 (1982): 906-940

Dissipation, Information, Computational Complexity and the Definition of Organization. " In Emerging Syntheses in Science, edited by D Pines, 297-313. Santa Fe Santa Fe Institute. 1985

Demons, Engines, and the Second Law. Scentific American 257, no5 (1987) 108-116.

Logical Depth and Physical Complexity. In The Universal Turing Machine: A Half- Century Survey, edited by Rolf Herken. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1988

Physics of Information, edited by WHZurek Reading, Mass: Addison-wesle 19 0 o the How to Define Complexity in Physics, and Why. In Complexity, Entropy, an

Notes on the History of Reversible Computation. /BM Journal of Research ana Deve/ opment44 (2000):270-277

Notes on Landauers Principle, Reversible Computation, and Maxwells Demon arxiv: physics 0210005 v2 (2003

Publicity, Privacy, and Permanence of Information. In Quantum Computing Back Action 2006, A/P Conference Proceedings 864, edited by Debabrata Goswami. Melville N. Y.: American Institute of Physics. 2006

Bennett, Charles H, and Gilles Brassard. Quantum Cryptography: Public Key Distribution and Coin Tossing. In Proceedings of EEE International Conference on Computers, Systems and Signal Processing, 175-179. Bangalore, India: 1984

Bennett, Charles H, Gilles Brassard, Claude Crepeau, Richard Jozsa, Asher Peres, and William K. Wootters. Teleporting an Unknown Quantum State Via Dual Classical and

Einstein-podolsky-rosen Channels. Physical Review Letters 70 (1993): 1895

Bennett, Charles H, and Rolf Landauer. Fundamental Physical Limits of Computation Scientific American 253, no1  (1985): 48-56

Bennett, Charles H, Ming Li, and Bin Ma. Chain Letters and Evolutionary Histories

Scientifc American 288, no6  (June 2003): 76-81

Benzer, Seymour. The Elementary Units of Heredity. In The Chemica Basis of Heredity edited by W. D. Mcelroy and B. Glass, 70-93. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1957

Berlinski, David. The Advent of the Algorithm: The ldea That Rules the World. New York Harcourt. 2000

Bernstein, Jeremy. The Analytical Engine: Computers-past, Present and Future. New York: Random House. 1963

Bikhchandani, Sushil, David Hirshleifer, and vo Welch. A Theory of Fads, Fashion Custom, and Cultural Change as Informational Cascades. Journal of Political Economy 100, no.5 (1992):992-1026

Blackmore, Susan. The Meme Machine. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1999

Blair, Ann. Reading Strategies for Coping with Information Overload ca1550-1700 Journal of the History of ldeas 64, no1  (2003): 11-28

Blohm, Hans, Stafford Beer, and David Suzuki. Pebbles to Computers: The

Thread T oronto: Oxford University Press, 1986

Boden, Margaret A. Mind as Machine: A History of Cognitive Science. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2006

Bollob as, Bela, and Oliver Riordan. Percolation. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2006.

Bolter, J. David. Turing s Man Western Culture in the Computer Age. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press. 1984

Boole, George. " The Calculus of Logic. Cambridge and Dublin Mathematical Journa 3 (1848):183-198

An Investigation of the Laws of Thought, on Which Are Founded the Mathematica. Theories of Logic and Probabilities. London: Walton&Maberly, 1854

Studies in Logic and Probability, vol 1. La Salle, ll. Open Court, 1952

Borges, Jorge Luis. Labyrinths. Selected Stories and Other Writings. New York: New Directions, 1962

Bouwmeester, Dik, Jian-wei Pan, Klaus Mattle, Manfred Eibl, Harald Weinfurter, and

Anton Zeilinger. Experimental Quantum Teleportation. Nature 390 (11 December 1997):575-579.

Bowden, B V, ed. Faster Than Thought: Symposium on Digital Computing Machines. New York: Pitman. 1953

Braitenberg, Valentino. Vehices Experiments in Synthetic Psycholog Cambridge, Mass MT Press. 1984

Brewer, Charlotte. Authority and Personality in the Oxford English Dictionary Transactions of the Philological Society 103, no.3 (2005): 261-301

Brewster, David. Letters on Natural Magic. New York: Harper&Brothers, 1843

Brewster, Edwin Tenney. A Guide to Living Things. Garden City, N Y. Doubleday, 1913

Bridenbaugh, Carl. The Great Mutation. American Historical Review 68, no.2 (1963) 315-331.

Briggs, Henry. Logarithmica l Arithmetike: Or Tables of Logarithmes for Absolute Numbers from an Unite to 700000. London: George Miller, 1631

Brillouin, Leon. Science and Information Theory. New York: Academic Press, 1956

Broadbent, Donald E. Perception and Communication. Oxford: Pergamon Press, 1958

Bromley, Allan G. The Evolution of Babbages Computers. Annals of the History of Computing9 (1987):113-136

Brown, John Seely, and Paul Duguid. The Social Life of Information. Boston: Harvard Business School Press. 2002

Browne, Thomas. Pseudoxia Epidemica: Or, Enquiries into Very Many Received Tenents, and Common/y Presumed Truths. Srd ed. London: Nath Ekins, 1658

Bruce, Robert V. Bell: Alexander Graham Bell and the Conquest of Solitude. Boston: Little Brown. 1973

Buckland, Michael K. Information as Thing. Journal of the American Society for Information Science 42 (1991): 351-360

Burchfeld, R W, and Hans Aarsleff. Oxford English Dictionary and the State of the Language. Washington D. C. Library of Congress, 1988

Burgess, Anthony. But Do Blondes Prefer Gentlemen? Homage to Qwert Yuiop and Other Writings. New York: Mcgraw-hill, 1986

Bush, Vannevar. As We May Think. The Atlantic, July1945

Butler. Samuel. Life and Habit. London: Trubner&Co. 1878

Essays on Life, Art and Science. Edited by R A Streatfeild Port Washington, NY Kennikat Press. 1970

Buxton, H W, and Anthony Hyman. Memoir of the Life and Labours of the Late Charles Babbage Esq, F R S Vol 13 of the Charles Babbage Institute Reprint Series for the History of Computing. Cambridge, Mass. MIT Press, 1988

Calude, Cristian S. Information and Randomness An Algorithmic Perspective. Berlin Springer, 2002

Calude, Cristian S. And Gregory J Chaitin. Randomness and Complexity: From Leibniz to Chaitin. Singapore, Hackensack, N. J.: World Scientific, 2007

Campbell-kelly, Martin. Charles Babbage Table of Logarithms (1827). Annals of the History of Computing 10  (1988): 159-169

Campbell-kelly, Martin, and William Aspray. Computer A History of the Information Machine. New York: Basic Books. 1996

Campbell-kelly, Martin, Mary Croarken, Raymond Flood, and Eleanor Robson, eds. The History of Mathematical Tables: From Sumer to Spreadsheets. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 2003

Campbell, Jeremy. Grammatical Man: Information, Entropy Language, and Life. New York Simon&Schuster. 1982

Campbell, Robert V. D. Evolution of Automatic Computation. In Proceedings of the 1952 ACM National Meeting (Pittsburgh, 29-32. New York: ACM, 1952

Carr, Nicholas. The Big Switch Rewiring the World, from Edison to Google. New York Norton. 2008

The Shallows What the Internet Is Doing to Our Brains. New York: Norton, 2010

Carrington, John F. A Comparative Study of Some Central African Gong Languages. Brussels: Falk, G. Van Campenhout, 1949

The Talking Drums of Africa. London: Carey Kingsgate, 1949

La Voix des tambours: comment comprendre le langage tambourine d Afrique Kinshasa: Centre Protestant d editions et de Diffusion. 1974

Casson, Herbert N. The History of the Telephone. Chicago: A C Mcclurg, 1910

Cawdrey, Robert. A Table A habeticall of Hard Usual English Words  (1604), the First English Dictionary. Gainesville, Fla. Scholars Facsimiles&Reprints, 1966

Ceruzzi, Paul. A History of Modern Computing. Cambridge, Mass MILT Press, 2003

Chaitin, Gregory J. On the Length of Programs for Computing Finite Binary Sequences Journal of the Association for Computing Machinery 13 (1966): 547-569

Information-theoretic Computational Complexity. EEE Transactions on Information Theory 20  (1974): 10-15

Information, Randomness Incompleteness: Papers on Algorithmic Information Theory. Singapore: World Scientifc, 1987

Algorithmic Information Theory. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1990

At Home in the Universe. Woodbury, N Y: American Institute of Physics, 1994

Conversations with a Mathematician. London: Springer, 2002

- Meta Math: The Quest for Omega. New York: Pantheon, 2005

The Limits of Reason. Scientific American 294, no.3  (March 2006): 74

Thinking About Gode/ and Turing Essays on Complexity, 7970-2007. Singapore World Scientific. 2007

Chandler, Alfred D, and Cortada, James W, eds. A Nation Transformed By Information

How Information Has Shaped the United States from Colonial Times to the Present. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2000

Chentsov, Nicolai N. The Unfathomable Influence of Kolmogorov. The Annals of Statistics18, no.3 (1990):987-998.

Cherry, E. Colin. A History of the Theory of Information. Transactions of the RE Professional Group on Information Theory 1, no 1 (1953): 22-43

On Human Communication. Cambridge, Mass. MIT Press, 1957

Chomsky, Noam. Three Models for the Description of Language. RE Transactions on

Information Theory 2, no.3 (1956): 113-124

- Reflections on Language. New York: Pantheon, 1975

Chrisley, Ronald, ed. Artificial Intelligence: Critica Concepts. London: Routledge, 2000

Church, Alonzo. On the Concept of a Random Sequence. Buletin of the American

Mathematical Society 46, no.2 (1940): 130-135

Churchland, Patricia S. And Terrence J. Seinowski. The Computation/ Brain. Cambridge Mass. MIT Press. 1992

Cilibrasi, Rudi, and Paul Vitanyi. Automatic Meaning Discovery Using Google. Arxi CS.CL/0412098v2,2005

Clanchy, M. T. From Memory to Written Record, England, 1066-1307. Cambridge, Mass Harvard University Press, 1979

Clarke, Roger T. The Drum Language of the Tumba People. American Journal of

Sociology40, no.1 (1934):34-48

Clayton, Jay. Charles Dickens in Cyberspace: The Afterlife of the Nineteenth Century in Postmodern Culture. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2003

Clerke, Agnes M. The Herschels and Modern Astronomy. New York: Macmillan, 1895

Coe, Lewis. The Telegraph: A History of Morses Invention and Its Predecessors in the United States, Jefferson. N. C. Mcfarland. 1993

Colton, F. Barrows. The Miracle of Talking by Telephone. National Geographic 72 (1937):395-433

Conway, Flo, and Jim Siegelman. Dark Hero of the Information Age: In Search of Norbert Wiener, the Father of Cybernetics. New York: Basic Books, 2005

Cooke, William Fothergill. The Electric Telegraph: Was It Invented by Professor Wheatstone? London: W. H. Smith &Son. 1857

Coote, Edmund. The English Schoole-maister. London: Ralph Jackson& Robert Dexter,

1596

Cordeschi, Roberto. The Discovery of the Artificial: Behavior, Mind, and Machines Before and Beyond Cybernetics. Dordrecht, Netherlands Springer, 2002

Cortada, James W. Before the Computer Princeton, N. J.: Princeton University Press, 1993

Cover, Thomas M, Peter Gacs, and Robert M. Gray. Kolmogorov's Contributions to Information Theory and Algorithmic Complexity. The Annals of Probability 17, no.3 (1989):840-865.

Craven, Kenneth. Jonathan Swift and the Millennium of Madness: The Information Age in

Swifts Tale of a Tub. Leiden. Netherlands: EJ. Brill. 1992

Crick, Francis. On Protein Synthesis. Symposium of the Society for Experimental Bio/ogy12(1958):138-163.

Central Dogma of Molecular Biology. Nature 227 (1970): 561-563

What Mad Pursuit. New York: Basic Books 1988

Croarken, Mary. Tabulating the Heavens: Computing the Nautical Almanac in 18 th Century England. EEE Annals of the History of Computing 25, no.3 (2003): 48-61

Mary Edwards: Computing for a Living in 18 th-century England. EEE Annals of

the History of Computing 25, no 4 (2003): 9-15

Crowley, David, and Paul Heyer, eds. Communication in History. Technology, Culture, Society. Boston: Allyn and Bacon, 2003

Crowley, David, and David Mitchell, eds. Communication Theory Today. Stanford, Calif Stanford University Press, 1994

Daly, Lloyd W. Contributions to a History of A/phabeticization in Antiquity and the Midde Ages. Brussels: Latomus, 1967

Danielsson. Uif H, and Marcelo Schiffer. Quantum Mechanics. Common Sense, and the

Black Hole Information Paradox. Physical Review 48, no10 (1993): 4779-4784

Darrow, Karl K. Entropy. Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society 87, no 5 (1944):365-367

Davis, Martin. The Universal Computer: The Road from Leibniz to Turing. New York Norton. 2000

Dawkins, Richard. " In Defence of Selfish Genes. Philosophy 56, no218 (1981): 556

573.

The Blind Watchmaker. New York: Norton, 1986

The Extended Phenotype. Rev. Ed. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1999

The Selfish Gene. 30 th anniversary edition. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2006

De Chadarevian, Soraya. The Selfish Gene at 30: The Origin and Career of a Book and Its Title. " Notes and Records of the Royal Society 61 (2007): 31-38

De Morgan, Augustus. Arithmetical Books: From the Invention of Printing to the Present Time. London: Taylor Walton, 1847

De Morgan, Sophia Elizabeth. Memoir of Augustus De Morgan. London: Longmans, Green 1882

Delbruck, Max. A Physicist Looks at Biology. Transactions of the Connecticut Academy of Arts and Sciences 38 (1949): 173-190

Delius, Juan D. Of Mind Memes and Brain Bugs, a Natural History of Culture. In The Nature of Culture, edited by Walter AKoch. Bochum, Germany: Bochum, 1989

Denbigh, KG, and J. S. Denbigh. Entropy in Relation to Incomplete Knowledge Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1984

Dennett, Daniel Memes and the Exploitation of Imagination. Ournal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism 48 (1990): 127-135

Consciousness Explained. Boston: Little, Brown, 1991

- Darwins Dangerous dea: Evolution and the Meanings of Life. New York Simon& Schuster. 1995

Brainchildren Essays on Designing Minds. Cambridge, Mass. MIT Press, 1998

Desmond, Adrian, and James Moore. Darwin. London: Michael Joseph, 1991

Diaz Vera, Javier E. A Changing World of Word Studies in English Historica Lexicography, Lexicology and Semantics. Amsterdam: Rodopi, 2002

Dilts, Marion May. The Telephone in a Changing World. New York: Longmans, Green, 1941

Diringer, David, and Reinhold Regensburger. The A/phabet: A Key to the History of Mankind. 3 rd ed. New York Funk Wagnalls, 1968

Dretske, Fred I. Knowledge and the Flow of Information. Cambridge, Mass. MIT Press 1981.

Duane, Alexander. Sight and Signalling in the Navy. Proceedings of the American Philosophica/Society 55, no5 (1916): 400-414

Dubbey, J M. The Mathematical Work of Charles Babbage. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1978

Dupuy, Jean-pierre. The Mechanization of the Mind. On the Origins of Cognitive Science. Translated by M. B. Debevoise. Princeton, NJ Princeton University Press, 2000

Dyson, George B. Darwin Among the Machines. The Evolution of Global Intelligence Cambridge, Mass. Perseus, 1997

Eco, Umberto. The Search for the Perfect Language. Translated by James Fentress. Malden. Mass. Blackwell 1995

Edwards, P. N. The Closed World: Computers and the Politics of Discourse in Cold War America. Cambridge, Mass. MIT Press, 1996

Eisenstein, Elizabeth L. Clio and Chronos: An Essay on the Making and Breaking of History-book Times. In History and Theory suppl.6: History and the Concept of Time 36-64 (1966

The Printing Press as an Agent of Change: Communications and Cultural Transformations in Early-modern Europe. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1979

Ekert. Artur. Shannons Theorem Revisited. Nature 367 (1994): 513-514

From Quantum Code-making to Quantum Code-breaking. Arxiv: quant ph/9703035v,1997.

Elias, Peter. Two Famous Papers. RE Transactions on nformation Theory 4, no.3 (1958):99

Emerson, Ralph Waldo. Society and Solitude. Boston: Fields, Osgood, 1870

Everett, Edward. The Uses of Astronomy. In Orations and Speeches on Various Occasions. 422-465. Boston: Little Brown. 1870

Fahie, J J A History of Electric Telegraphy to the Year 1837. London: E. &F. N. Spon, 1884

Fauvel, John, and Jeremy Gray. The History of Mathematics: A Reader. Mathematical

Association of America. 1997

Feferman, Solomon, ed. Kurt Gode Collected Works. New York: Oxford University Press,

1986.

Feynman, Richard P. The Character of Physical Law. New York: Modern Library, 1994

"enman Lectures on Computation. Edited by Anthony J. G. Hey and Robin W. Allen Boulder. Colo. Westview Press. 1996

Finnegan, Ruth. Oral Literature in Africa. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1970

Fischer, Claude S. America Calling Social History of the Telephone to 7940. Berkeley University of California Press, 1992

Ford, Joseph. Directions in Classical Chaos. N Directions in Chaos, edited by Hao Bai lin. Singapore: World Scientific, 1987

Franksen, Ole I. "Introducing Mr Babbages Secret. "APL Quote Quad 15, no1 (1984)

14-17

Friedman, William F. Edgar Allan Poe, Cryptographer. American Literature 8, no 3 (1936):266-280

Fuchs, Christopher A. Notes on a Paulian Idea: Foundational, Historical, Anecdotal and

Forward-looking Thoughts on the Quantum. Arxiv: quant-ph/0705039, 2001

Quantum Mechanics as Quantum Information (and Only a Little More 2002. Arxiv: quant-ph/0205039 v, 8 May 2001

Qbism, the Perimeter of Quantum Bayesianism arxiv: quant-ph/1003.5209 vi 2010

Coming of Age with Quantum Information: Notes on a Paulian Idea. Cambridge Mass. Cambridge University Press, 2010

Galison, Peter. Image and Logic: A Materia Culture of Microphysics. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1997

Gallager, Robert G. " Claude E. Shannon: A Retrospective on His Life, Work, and Impact IEEE Transactions on Information 47, no.7  (2001): 2681-2695

Gamow, George. Possible Relation Between Deoxyribonucleic Acid and Protein Structures. Nature 173 (1954): 318

Information Transfer in the Living Cell. Scientific American 193, no10 (October 1955):70.

Gardner, Martin. Hexaflexagons and Other Mathematica Diversions. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1959

Martin Gardners Sixth Book of Mathematica/Games from Scientific American. San Francisco: W. H. Freeman, 1963

Gasser, James, ed. A Boole Anthology: Recent and Classical Studies in the Logic of George Boole. Dordrecht, Netherlands: Kluwer, 2000

Gell-mann, Murray, and Seth Lloyd. "Information Measures, Effective Complexity, and Total Information. "Complexity 2, no 1 (1996): 44-52

Genosko, Gary. Marshall Mcluhan Critical Evaluations in Cultural Theory. Abingdon, U. K Routledge, 2005

Geoghegan, Bernard Dionysius. The Historiographic Conceptualization of Information: A Critical Survey. " Annals of the History of Computing (2008): 66-81

Gerovitch, Slava. From Newspeak to Cyberspeak: A History of Soviet

 (bernetics. Cambridge, Mass. MIT Press, 2002

Gibert, E N. "Information Theory After 18 Years. Science 152, no3720 (1966): 320 326.

Gilder, Louisa. The Age of Entanglement When Quantum Physics Was Reborn. New York

Knopf, 2008

Gilliver, Peter, Jeremy Marshall, and Edmund Weiner. The Ring of Words Tolkien and the Oxford English Dictionary. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2006

Gitelman, Lisa, and Geoffrey B Pingree, eds. New Media 7740-797. Cambridge, Mass MIT Press. 2003

Glassner, Jean-jacques. The Invention of Cuneiform. Translated and edited by Zainab Bahrani and Marc Van De Mieroop. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2003

Gleick, James. Chaos: Making a New Science. New York: Viking, 1987

The Lives They Lived Claude Shannon, B 1916; Bit Player. New York Times Magazine, 30 December 2001, 48

What Just Happened. A Chronicle from the Information Frontier. New York: Pantheon 2002

Godel, Kurt. Russells Mathematical Logic  (1944). In Kurt Godel: Collected Works edited by Solomon Feferman, vol 2, 119. New York: Oxford University Press, 1986

Goldsmid, Frederic John. Telegraph and Trave: A Narrative of the Formation and

Development of Telegraphic Communication Between England and India, Under the Orders of Her Maiesty's Government, With Incidental Notices of the Countries Traversed By the Lines. London: Macmillan, 1874

Goldstein, Rebecca. Incompleteness The Proof and Paradox of Kurt Gode/ New Yo Atlas. 2005

Goldstine, Herman H "Information Theory. Science 133, no3462  (1961): 1395-1399

The Computer From Pasca/ to von Neumann. Princeton, N. J. Princeton Universit Press, 1973. Goodwin, Astley J. H. Communication Has Been Established. London Methuen, 1937

Goody, Jack. The Domestication of the Savage Mind. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 1977

The Interface Between the Written and the Oral. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 1987

Goody, Jack, and lan Watt. The Consequences of Literacy. Comparative Studies in Society and History 5, no.3 (1963): 304-345

Goonatilake, Susantha. The Evolution of Information Lineages in Gene, Culture and Artefact London: Pinter, 1991

Gorman, Michael E. Transforming Nature: Ethics, Invention and Discovery. Boston: Kluwer Academic. 1998

Gould, Stephen Jay. The Panda's Thumb New York: Norton, 1980

Humbled by the Genomes Mysteries. The New York Times, 19 February 2001

Grafen, Alan, and Mark Ridley, eds. Richard Dawkins: How a Scientist Changed the Way We Think. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2006

Graham, A. C. Studies in Chinese Philosophy and Philosophical Literature. Vol. SUNY Series in Chinese Philosophy and Culture. Albany: State University of New York Press, 1990

Green, Jonathon. Chasing the Sun. Dictionary Makers and the Dictionaries They Made. New York Holt. 1996

Gregersen, Niels Henrik, ed. From Complexity to Life: On the Emergence of Life and Meaning. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2003

Griffths, Robert B. The Nature and Location of Quantum Information. Physica/ Review

A6 (2002):012311-012325.

Grunwald, Peter and Paul Vitanyi. "Shannon Information and Kolmogorov Complexity arxiv: cs /T/0410002 v1, 8 August 2005

Guizzo, Erico Mariu. The Essential Message: Claude Shannon and the Making of

Information Theory. Masters thesis, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, September

2003.

Gutfreund, H, and G. Toulouse. Biology and Computation: A Physicists Choice. Singapore World Scientific. 1994

Hailperin, Theodore. Booles Algebra Isnt Boolean Algebra. Mathematics Magazine 54, no.4 (1981):172-184.

Halstead, Frank G. The Genesis and Speed of the Telegraph Codes. Proceedings of the

American Philosophical Society 93, no5  (1949): 448-458

Halverson, John. Goody and the Implosion of the Literacy Thesis. Man 27 no. 2  (1992): 301-317. Harlow, Alvin F. Old Wires and New Waves. New York: D Appleton Century, 1936

Harms, William F. " The Use of Information Theory in Epistemology. Philosophy of Science65, no.3 (1998):472-501

Harris, Roy. Rethinking Writing. Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 2000

Hartley, Ralph V. L. Transmission of Information. Be// System Technical Journal 7 (1928):535-563

Havelock, Eric A. Preface to Plato. Cambridge, Mass. Harvard University Press, 1963

The Muse Learns to Write Reflections on Orality and Literacy from Antiquity to the Present. New Haven, Conn. Yale University Press. 1986

Havelock. Eric Alfred. And Jackson P. Hershbell. Communication Arts in the Ancient World. New York: Hastings House, 1978

Hawking, Stephen. God Created the Integers The Mathematical Breakthroughs That Changed History. Philadelphia: Running Press, 2005

Information Loss in Black Holes. Physical Review D 72, arxiv hep-th/0507171v2 2005.

Hayles, N. Katherine. How We Became Posthuman. Virtual Bodies in Cybernetics, Literature, and Informatics. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1999

Headrick, Daniel R. When Information Came of Age. Technologies of Knowledge in the

Age of Reason and Revolution, 1700-1850. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2000

Heims, Steve J. Ohn von Neumann and Norbert Wiener. Cambridge, Mass. MIT Press, 1980.

The Cybernetics Group. Cambridge, Mass. MIT Press, 1991

Herken, Rolf, ed. The Universal Turing Machine: A Half-century Survey. Vienna: Springer Verlag, 1995

Hey, Anthony J. G., ed. Feynman and Computation. Boulder, Colo. Westview Press, 2002

Hobbes Thomas. Leviathan, or. The Matter. Forme and Power of a Commonwealth Eclesiastical l and Civil. London: Andrew Crooke 1660

Hodges, Andrew. Alan Turing The Enigma. London: Vintage, 1992

Hofstadter, Douglas R. Godel, Escher, Bach: An Eterna Golden Braid. New York: Basic Books. 1979

Metamagical Themas: Questing for the Essence of Mind and Pattern. New York Basic Books, 1985

-. / Am a Strange Loop. New York: Basic Books, 2007

Holland Owen. The First Biologically Inspired Robots. Robotica 21 (2003): 351-363

Holmes, Oliver Wendell. The Autocrat of the Breakfast-table. New York Houghton Miffl in

893

Holzmann, Gerard J, and Bjorn Pehrson. The Early History of Data Networks. Washington D. C: IEEE Computer Society, 1995

Hopper, Robert. Telephone Conversation. Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1992

Horgan, John. Claude E. Shannon. IEEE Spectrum  (April 1992): 72-75

Horsley, Victor. Description of the Brain of Mr Charles Babbage, F R S. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London, Series B 200  (1909): 117-131

Huberman, Bernardo A. The Laws of the Web: Patterns in the Ecology of Information Cambridge, Mass. MIT Press, 2001

Hughes, Geoffrey. A History of English Words. Oxford: Blackwell, 2000

Hullen, Werner. English Dictionaries 800-1700: The Topical Tradition. Oxford: Clarendon Press. 1999

Hume, Alexander. Of the Orthographie and Congruitie of the Britan Tongue  (1620) Edited from the original ms in the British Museum by Henry B. Wheatley London: Early English Text Society, 1865

Husbands, Philip, and Owen Holland. The Ratio Club: A Hub of British Cybernetics The Mechanical Mind in History 91-148. Cambridge, Mass. MIT Press, 2008

Husbands, Philip, Owen Holland, and Michael Wheeler, eds. The Mechanical Mind in History. Cambridge, Mass. MIIT Press, 2008

Huskey, Harry D, and Velma R. Huskey. Lady Lovelace and Charles Babbage. Annals of the History of Computing 2 no 4 (1980): 299-329

Hyatt, Harry Middleton. Fokk-lore from Adams County, linois. 2 nd and rev. Ed. Hannibal Mo. Alma Egan Hyatt Foundation, 1965

Hyman, Anthony. Charles Babbage Pioneer of the Computer. Princeton, N. J.: Princeton University Press, 1982

Hyman, Anthony, ed. Science and Reform: Selected Works of Charles Babbage Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1989

Ifrah, Georges. The Universal History of Computing: From the Abacus to the Quantum Computer. New York: Wiley and Sons, 2001

Ivanhoe, P. J., and Bryan W. Van Norden. Readings in Classical Chinese Philosophy. 2 nd ed. Indianapolis Hackett Publishing, 2005

Jackson, Willis, ed. Communication Theory. New York: Academic Press, 1953

James, William. Principles of Psychology. Chicago: Encyclopaedia Britannica, 1952

Jaynes, Edwin T. " Information Theory and Statistical Mechanics. Physical Review 106 no.4 (1957):620-630

- Where Do We Stand on Maximum Entropy. N The Maximum Entropy Formalism, edited by R. D. Levine and Myron Tribus. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1979

Jaynes, Edwin T, Walter T Grandy, and Peter W. Milonni. Physics and Probability Essays in Honor of Edwin TJaynes. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1993

Jaynes, Julian. The Origin of Consciousness in the Breakdown of the Bicamera/ Mlind Boston: Houghton Miffl in, 1977

Jennings, Humphrey. Pandaemonium: The Coming of the Machine as seen By Contemporary Observers, 1660-1886. Edited by Mary-lou Jennings and Charles Madge. New York: Free Press, 1985

Johannsen, Wilhelm. The Genotype Conception of Heredity. American Naturalist 45 no.531 (1911:129-159.

Johns, Adrian. The Nature of the Book Print and Knowledge in the Making. Chicago University of Chicago Press, 1998

Johnson, George. Fire in the Mind. Science, Faith, and the Search for Order. New York

Knopf. 1995

Claude Shannon, Mathematician, Dies at 84. The New York Times, 27 February 2001. B7

Johnson, Horton A. Thermal Noise and Biological Information. Quarterly Review of Biology62, no.2 (1987):141-152.

Joncourt, Elie de. De Natura et Praeclaro Usu Simplicissimae Speciei Numerorum Trigonalium. Edited by E de Joncourt Auctore. Hagae Comitum: Husson, 1762

Jones, Alexander. Historical Sketch of the Electric Telegraph Including Its Rise and Progress in the United States. New York: Putnam, 1852

Jones, Jonathan. "Quantum Computers Get Real. Physics World 15, no4 (2002): 21

22

Quantum Computing: Putting It into Practice. Nature 421 (2003): 28-29

Judson, Horace Freeland. The Eighth Day of Creation Makers of the Revolution in Biology. New York: Simon Schuster, 1979

Kahn, David. The Codebreakers: The Story of Secret Writing. London Weidenfeld&Nicolson, 1968

Seizing the Enigma: The Race Break the German U-boat Codes, 7939-7943 New

York: Barnes Noble 1998

Kahn. Robert E A Tribute to Claude E Shannon. EEE Communications

Magazine (2001):18-22.

Kalin, Theodore A. " Formal Logic and Switching Circuits. In Proceedings of the 7952 ACM National Meeting (Pittsburgh, 251-257. New York: ACM, 1952

Kauffman, Stuart. Investigations. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2002

Kay, Lily E. Who Wrote the Book of Life: A History of the Genetic Code. Stanford, Calif Stanford University Press, 2000

Kelly, Kevin. Out of Contro. The Rise of Neo-biological Civilization. Reading, Mass Addison-wesley, 1994

Kendall, David G. Andrei Nikolaevich Kolmogorov. 25 April 1903-1920 October 1987 Biographical Memoirs of Fellows of the Royal Society 37  (1991): 301-319

Keynes, John Maynard. A Treatise on Probability. London: Macmillan, 1921

Kneale, William. Boole and the Revival of Logic. Mind 57, no226 (1948): 149-175

Knuth, Donald E. Ancient Babylonian Algorithms. Communications of the Association for Computing Machinery 15, no.7 (1972): 671-677

Kolmogorov, A N. Combinatorial Foundations of Information Theory and the Calculus of Probabilities. Russian Mathematica/ Surveys 38, no 4 (1983): 29-43

Selected Works of A N. Kolmogorov. Vol. 3, Information Theory and the Theory of Algorithms. Translated by A. B. Sossinksky. Dordrecht, Netherlands: Kluwer Academic Publishers. 1993

Kolmogorov, A N, I M. Gelfand, and A M. Yaglom. " On the General Definition of the Quantity of Information 1956) In Selected Works of A. N. Kolmogorov, vol3 Information Theory and the Theory of Algorithms, 2-5. Dordrecht, Netherlands: Kluwer Academic Publishers. 1993

Kolmogorov, A N, and A N Shiryaev. Kolmogorov in Perspective. History of Mathematics vol 20. Translated by Harold H. Mcfaden. N. P. American Mathematical Society, London Mathematical Society, 2000

Krutch, Joseph Wood. Edgar Allan Poe: A Study in Genius. New York: Knopf, 1926

Kubat, Libor, and Jiri Zeman. Entropy and Information in Science and Philosophy Amsterdam: Elsevier. 1975

Langville, Amy N, and Carl D. Meyer. Googles Page Rank and Beyond: The Science of Search Engine Rankings. Princeton, N. J.: Princeton University Press, 2006

Lanier, Jaron. You Are Not a Gadget. New York: Knopf, 2010

Lanouette William. Genius in the Shadows. New York: Scribners 1992

Lardner, Dionysius. Babbages Calculating Engines. Edinburgh Review 59, no 120 (1834):263-327

- The Electric Telegraph. Revised and rewritten by Edward B Bright. London: James Walton. 1867

Lasker. Edward. The Adventure of Chess. 2 nd ed. New York: Dover. 1959

Leavitt, Harold J, and Thomas L Whisler. Management in the 1980 s. Harvard Business

Review (1958):1-48

Leff, Harvey S, and Andrew F. Re, eds. Maxwe s Demon. Entropy, Information, Computing. Princeton, N. J.: Princeton University Press, 1990

-. Maxwel's Demon 2. Entropy, Classical and Quantum Information, Computing Bristo U. K.: Institute of Physics, 2003

Lenoir, Timothy, ed. Inscribing Science: Scientific Texts and the Materiality of Communication. Stanford, Calif. Stanford University Press, 1998

Licklider, J C R. Interview Conducted by William Aspray and Arthur Norberg.  (1988)

Lieberman, Phillip. Voice in the Wilderness: How Humans Acquired the Power of Speech. Sciences  (1988): 23-29

Lloyd, Seth. Computational Capacity of the Universe. Physical Review Letters 88 no23 (2002). Arxiv: quant-ph/0170141 V7

Programming the Universe. New York: Knopf, 2006

Loewenstein. Werner R. The ouchstone of Life Molecular Information. Cell Communication, and the Foundations of Life. New York: Oxford University Press, 1999

Lucky, Robert W. Silicon Dreams Information, Man, and Machine. New York: St Martins Press. 1989

Lundheim. Lars. On Shannon and Shannons Formula. "Telektronikk 98, no1 (2002) 20-29

Luria, A. R. Cognitive Deveopment: Its Cultural and Social Foundations. Cambridge, Mass Harvard University Press, 1976

Lynch, Aaron. Thought Contagion How Belief Spreads Through Society. New York: Basic Books. 1996

Mabee, Carleton. The American Leonardo: A Life of Samue/ F B Morse. New York: Knopf,

1943

Macfarlane, Alistair G J. Information, Knowledge, and the Future of Machines

Philosophical Transactions: Mathematica, Physical and Engineering Sciences 361, no 1809 (2003):1581-1616.

Machlup, Fritz, and Una Mansheld, eds. The Study of Information: Interdisciplinary Messages. Ew York: Wiley and Sons, 1983

Machta, J. Entropy, Information, and Computation. American Journal of Physics 67, no.12 (1999):1074-1077

Mackay Charles. Memoirs of Extraordinary Popular Delusions. Philadelphia indsay &Blakiston, 1850

Mackay, David J C. Information Theory Inference, and Learning Algorithms. Cambridge Cambridge University Press, 2002

Mackay, Donald M. Information, Mechanism, and Meaning. Cambridge, Mass. MIT Press

1969

Macrae, Norman. John von Neumann: The Scientifc Genius Who Pioneered the Modern

Computer, Game Theory, Nuclear Deterrence, and Much More. New York: Pantheon, 1992

Macray, William Dunn. Annals of the Bodleian Library Oxford, 7598-1867. London Rivingtons, 1868

Mancosu Paolo. From Brouwer to Hilbert: The Debate on the Foundations of Mathematics in the 7920 s. New York: Oxford University Press, 1998

Marland, E. A. Early Electrica/ Communication. London: Abelard-schuman, 1964

Martin, Michele. He lo, Centra?: Gender, Technology, and Culture in the Formation of

Teephone Systems. Montreal: Mcgill-queens University Press, 1991

Marvin, Carolyn. When ld Technologies Were New: Thinking About Electric

Communication in the Late Nineteenth Century. New York: Oxford University Press, 1988

Maxwell, James Clerk. Theory of Heat. 8 th ed. London: Longmans, Green, 1885

Mayr, Otto. Maxwell and the Origins of Cybernetics. Isis 62, no 4 (1971): 424-444

Mcculloch, Warren S. Brain and Behavior. Comparative Psychology Monograph 20 1 Series103 (1950)

Through the Den of the Metaphysician. British Journal for the Philosophy of Science5, no.17 (1954):18-31

Embodiments of Mind. Cambridge, Mass. MIT Press, 1965

Recollections of the Many Sources of Cybernetics. ASC Forum 6, no.2 (1974): 5

Mcculloch, Warren S, and John Pfeiffer. Of Digital Computers Called Brains. Scientific

Monthly69, no.6 (1949):368-376.

Mcluhan, Marshall. The Mechanical Bride: Folklore of Industrial Man. New York: Vanguard Press. 1951

The Gutenberg Galaxy. Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1962

Understanding Media: The Extensions of Man. New York: Mcgraw-hill, 1965

B O.Essentia/Mcluhan. Edited by Eric Mcluhan and Frank Zingrone New York: Basic ks.1996

Mcluhan, Marshall, and Quentin Fiore. The Medium /s the Massage. New York: Random House, 1967

Mcneely, lan F, with Lisa Wolverton. Reinventing Knowledge From Alexandria to the Internet. New York: Norton, 2008

Menabrea, L F. Sketch of the Analytical Engine Invented by Charles Babbage. With notes upon the Memoir by the Translator, Ada Augusta, Countess of Lovelace. Bibliotheque Universelle de Geneve 82 (October 1842 Also available online at http://www.fourmilab.ch/babbage/sketch.htm

Menninger, Karl, and Paul Broneer. Number Words and Number Symbols: A Cultura History of Numbers. Dover Publications, 1992

Mermin, N. David. Copenhagen Computation: How I Learned to Stop Worrying and Love Bohr. /BM Journal of Research and Development 48 (2004): 53-61

Quantum Computer Science: An Introduction. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 2007

Miller, George A. The Magical Number Seven, Plus or Minus Two: Some Limits on Our

Capacity for Processing Information. Psychological Review 63 (1956): 81-97

Miller, Jonathan Marshall Mcluhan. New York: Viking, 1971

States of Mind. New York: Pantheon. 1983

Millman, S, ed. A History of Engineering and Science in the Bell System: Communications Sciences  (7925-7980. Bell Telephone Laboratories, 1984

Mindell, David A. Between Human and Machine Feedback, Control, and Computing Before Cybernetics. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2002

Mindell, David A, Jerome Segal, and Slava Gerovitch. Cybernetics and Information Theory in the United States, France, and the Soviet Union. In Science and ldeology: A Comparative History, edited by Mark Walker, 66-95. London: Routledge, 2003

Monod, Jacques. Chance and Necessity: An Essay on the Natura Philosophy of Modern Biology. Translated by Austryn Wainhouse. New York: Knopf, 1971

Moore Francis. Trave s Into the /n/and Parts of Africa. London: J. Knox. 1767

Moore, Gordon E. Cramming More Components onto Integrated Circuits. Electronics 38, no.8 (1965):114-117

Morowitz, Harold J. The Emergence of Everything: How the World Became Complex. New

York: Oxford University Press. 2002

Morse, Samuel F B. Samue/F B. Morse. His Letters and Journals. Edited by Edward Lind

Morse. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1914

Morus, lwan Rhys. The Nervous System of Britain: Space, Time and the Electric Telegraph in the Victorian Age. British Journal of the History of Science 33 (2000) 455-475.

Moseley, Maboth. Rascible Genius: A Life of Charles Babbage, Inventor. London Hutchinson, 1964

Mugglestone, Lynda. Labels Reconsidered: Objectivity and the OED. Dictionaries 21 (2000):22-37

Lost for Words: The Hidden History of the Oxford English Dictionary. New Haven Conn. Yale University Press, 2005

Mulcaster. Richard. The First Part of the Elementarie Which Entreateth Chefelie of the Right Writing of Our English Tung. London: Thomas Vautroullier, 1582

Mullett, Charles F. Charles Babbage: A Scientific Gadfly. Scientific Monthly 67, no 5 (1948):361-371

Mumford, Lewis. The Myth of the Machine. Vol. 2, The Pentagon of Power. New York Harcourt. Brace. 1970

Murray, K. M. E. Caught in the Web of Words. New Haven, Conn: Yale University Press, 1978.

Mushengyezi, Aaron. Rethinking Indigenous Media: Rituals, Talking Drums and Orality as Forms of Public Communication in Uganda. Journa of African Cultural Studies 16, no  (2003):107-117

Nagel, Ernest, and James R. Newman. Gode/'s Proof. New York: New York University Press, 1958.

Napier, John. A Description of the Admirable Table of Logarithmes. Translated by Edward Wright. London: Nicholas Okes, 1616

Nemes, Tihamer. Cybernetic Machines. Translated by IFoldes. New York: Gordon&Breach 1970

Neugebauer, Otto. The Exact Sciences in Antiquity. Providence, R. L.: Brown University Press. 1957

A History of Ancient Mathematical Astronomy. Studies in the History of Mathematics and Physical Sciences, vol 1. New York: Springer-verlag, 1975

Neugebauer, Otto, Abraham Joseph Sachs, and Albrecht Gotze. Mathematical Cuneiform Texts. American Oriental Series, vol. 29. New Haven, Conn: American Oriental Society and the American Schools of Oriental Research. 1945

Newman, M. E. J. The Structure and Function of Complex Networks. S/AM Review 45

no.2 (2003):167-256.

Niven, W. D., ed. The Scientific Papers of James Clerk Maxwe. Cambridge: Cambridge

University Press, 1890; repr. New York: Dover, 1965

Norman, Donald A. Things That Make Us Smart: Defending Human Attributes in the Age of the Machine Reading, Mass. Addison-wesley, 1993

Norretranders, Tor. The User l/usion: Cutting Consciousness Down to Size. Translated by Jonathan Sydenham. New York: Penguin, 1998

Noyes, Gertrude E. The First English Dictionary, Cawdrey's Table Alphabeticall. Modern Language Notes 58, no8 (1943): 600-605

Ogilvie, Brian W. The Many Books of Nature: Renaissance Naturalists and Information

Overload. Journal of the History of Ideas 64, no1  (2003): 29-40

The Science of Describing Natural History in Renaissance Europe. Chicago University of Chicago Press, 2006

Olson, David R. From Utterance to Text: The Bias of Language in Speech and Writing

Harvard Educational Review 47 (1977): 257-281

The Cognitive Consequences of Literacy. Canadian Psychology 27, no.2 (1986) 109-121

Ong, Walter J. This Side of Oral Culture and of Print. Lincoln Lecture  (1973)

African Talking Drums and Oral Noetics. New Literary History&, no.3 (1977) 411-429

Interfaces of the Word. Ithaca, N. Y.: Cornell University Press, 1977

Orality and Literacy: The Technologizing of the Word. London: Methuen, 1982

Oslin, George P. The Story of Telecommunications. Macon, Ga. Mercer University Press, 1992

Page, Lawrence, Sergey Brin, Rajeev Motwani, and Terry Winograd. "The Pagerank Citation Ranking: Bringing Order to the Web. Technical Report SIDLWP-1999-0120

Stanford University In olab (1998). Available online at h p: pubs. Stanford. du 8090/422/1/1999-6.pd

Pain, Stephanie. "Mr Babbage and the Buskers. New Scientist 179, no2408 (2003) 42

Paine, Albert Bigelow. In One Mans Life Being Chapters from the Persona&Business Career of Theodore N Vai. New York: Harper&Brothers, 1921

Palme. Jacob. You Have 134 Unread Mail! Do You Want to Read Them Now? n Computer-based Message Services, edited by Hugh T Smith. North Holland: Elsevier 1984.

Peckhaus, Volker. 19 th Century Logic Between Philosophy and Mathematics. Bulletin of Symbolic Logic 5, no 4 (1999): 433-450

Peres, Asher. "Einstein, Podolsky, Rosen, and Shannon. arxiv quant-ph/0310010 v 2003.

What Is Actually Teleported? BM Journal of Research and Development 48, no.1 (2004):63-69

Perez-montoro, Mario. The Phenomenon of Information: A Conceptua Approach to Information Flow. Translated by Dick Edelstein. Lanham, Md: Scarecrow, 2007

Peters, John Durham. Speaking Into the Air: A History of the /dea of Communication Chicago University of Chicago Press, 1999

Philological Society. Proposal for a Publication of a New English Dictionary by the Philological Society. London: Trubner& Co, 1859

Pickering, John. A Lecture on Telegraphic Language. Boston: Hilliard, Gray, 1833

Pierce, John R. Symbols, Signals and Noise The Nature and Process of Communication. New York: Harper Brothers, 1961

The Early Days of Information Theory. EEE Transactions on Information Theory 19 no.1 (1973):3-8.

An Introduction to Information Theory: Symbols, Signals and Noise. 2 nd ed. New York

Dover 1980

ooking Back: Claude Elwood Shannon. /EEE Potentials 12, no. 4 (December 1993):38-40.

Pinker, Steven. The Language Instinct: How the Mind Creates Language. New York William Morrow. 1994

The Stuff of Thought: Language as a Window into Human Nature. New York: Viking 2007.

Platt, John R, ed. New Views of the Nature of Man. Chicago: University of Chicago Press 1983

Plenio, Martin B, and Vincenzo Vitelli. The Physics of Forgetting: Landauers Erasure Principle and Information Theory Contemporary Physics 42, no1 (2001): 25-60

Poe, Edgar Allan. Essays and Reviews. Ew York: Library of America, 1984

Poetry and Tales. New York: Library of America, 1984

Pool, Ithiel de Sola, ed. The Socia/Impact of the Telephone. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1977

Poundstone, William. The Recursive Universe: Cosmic Complexity and the Limits of Scientific Knowledge. Chicago: Contemporary Books, 1985

Prager, John. On Turing. Belmont, Calif. Wadsworth, 2001

Price, Robert. "A Conversation with Claude Shannon: One Mans Approach to Problem Solving. /EEE Communications Magazine 22 (1984): 123-126

Pulgram, Ernst. Theory of Names. Berkeley, Calif. American Name Society, 1954

Purbrick, Louise. The Dream Machine: Charles Babbage and His Imaginary Computers

Journal of Design History 6: 1 (1993): 9-23

Quastler, Henry, ed. Essays on the Use of Information Theory in Biology. Urbana University of Illinois Press, 1953

-. Information Theory in Psychology Problems and Methods. Glencoe, l: Free Press,

1955

Radford, Gary P. Overcoming Deweys False Psychology: Reclaiming Communication for Communication Studies. Paper presented at the 80 th Annual Meeting of the Speech Communication Association. New Orleans November 1994. Available online at http://www.theprofessors.net/dewey.html

Rattray, Robert Sutherland. The Drum Language of West Africa: Part l. Journal of the Royal African Society 22, no87 (1923): 226-236

- The Drum Language of West Africa: Part I. Ournal of the Royal African Society 22, no.88 (1923):302-316

Redfield. Robert. The Primitive World and ts ransformations. Ithaca. N Y: Cornell

University Press, 1953

Renyi, Alfred. A Diary on Information Theory. Chichester, N Y: Wiley and Sons, 1984

Rheingold, Howard. Tools for Thought The History and Future of Mind-expanding Technology. Cambridge, Mass. MIT Press, 2000

Rhodes, Frederick Leland. Beginnings of Telephony. New York: Harper&Brothers, 1929

Rhodes, Neil, and Jonathan Sawday, eds. The Renaissance Computer: Knowledge Technology in the First Age of Print. London: Routledge, 2000

Richardson Robert D. Wiliam James. In the Mae strom of American Modernism. New

York: Houghton Mifflin, 2006

Robertson, Douglas S. The New Renaissance. Computers and the Next Level of Civilization. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1998

Phase Change: The Computer Revolution in Science and Mathematics. Oxford Oxford University Press, 2003

Rochberg, Francesca. The Heaven/y Writing Divination, Horoscopy, and Astronomy in Mesopotamian Culture. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2004


