BIBLIOGRAPHY

[1]. BERNSTEIN, S.: On the axiomatic foundation of the theory of probability. (In Russian). Mitt. Math. Ges. Charkov, 1917, Pp. 209–274.

[2]. — Theory of probability, 2nd edition. (In Russian). Moscow, 1927. Government publication RSFSR.

[1]. BOREL, E.: Les probabilités dénombrables et leurs applications arithmétiques. Rend. Circ. mat. Palermo Vol. 27 (1909) Pp. 247–271.

[2]. — Principes et formules classiques, fasc. 1 du tome I du Traité des probabilités par E. BOREL et divers auteurs. Paris: Gauthier-Villars 1925.

[3]. — Applications à l’arithmétique et à la théorie des fonctions, fasc. 1 du tome II du Traité des probabilités par E. BOREL et divers auteurs. Paris: Gauthier-Villars 1926.

[1]. CANTELLI, F. P. : Una teoria astratta del Calcolo delle probabilità. Giorn. 1st. Ital. Attuari Vol. 3 (1932) pp. 257–265.

[2]. — Sulla legge dei grandi numeri. Mem. Acad. Lincei Vol. 11 (1916).

[3]. — Sulla probabilità come limite della frequenza. Rend. Accad. Lincei Vol. 26 (1917) Pp. 39–45.

[1]. COPELAND H : The theory of probability from the point of view of admissible numbers. Ann. Math. Statist. Vol. 3 (1932) Pp. 143–156.

[1]. DÖRGE, K. : Zu der von R. von Mises gegebenen Begründung der Wahrscheinlichkeitsrechnung. Math. Z. Vol. 32 (1930) Pp. 232–258.

[1]. FRECHET, M.: Sur la convergence en probabilité. Metron Vol. 8 (1930) Pp. 1–48.

[2]. — Recherches théoriques modernes, fasc. 3 du tome I du Traité des probabilités par E. Borel et divers auteurs. Paris: Gauthier-Villars.

[1]. KOLMOGOROV, A.: Über die analytischen Methoden in der Wahrscheinlichkeitsrechnung. Math. Ann. Vol. 104 (1931) Pp. 415–458.

[2]. — The general theory of measure and the theory of probability. (In Russian). Sbornik trudow sektii totshnych nauk K. A., Vol. 1 (1929) pp. 8–21.

[1]. LÉVY, P.: Calcul des probabilités. Paris: Gauthier-Villars.

[1]. LOMNICKI, A.: Nouveaux fondements du calcul des probabilités. Fundam. Math. Vol. 4 (1923) Pp. 34–71.

[1]. MISES, R. v. : Wahrscheinlichkeitsrechnung. Leipzig u. Wien: Fr. Deuticke 1931.

[2]. — Grundlagen der Wahrscheinlichkeitsrechnung. Math. Z. Vol. 5 (1919) pp. 52–99.

[3]. — Wahrscheinlichkeitsrechnung, Statistik und Wahrheit. Wien: Julius Springer 1928.

[3′]. — Probability, Statistics and Truth (translation of above). New York: The MacMillan Company 1939.

[1]. REICHENBACH, H.: Axiomatik der Wahrscheinlichkeitsrechnung. Math. Z. Vol. 34 (1932) Pp. 568–619.

[1]. SLUTSKY, E.: Über stochastische Asymptoten und Grenzwerte. Metron Vol. 5 (1925) Pp. 3–89.

[2]. — On the question of the logical foundation of the theory of probability. (In Russian). Westnik Statistiki, Vol. 12 (1922), pp. 13–21.

[1]. STEINHAUS, H.: Les probabilités dénombrables et leur rapport à la théorie de la mesure. Fundam. Math. Vol. 4 (1923) Pp. 286–310.

[1]. TORNIER, E.: Wahrscheinlichkeitsrechnung und Zahlentheorie. J. reine angew. Math. Vol. 160 (1929) Pp. 177–198.

[2]. — Grundlagen der Wahrscheinlichkeitsrechnung. Acta math. Vol. 60 (1933) Pp. 239–380.

SUPPLEMENTARY

BIBLIOGRAPHY

NOTES TO SUPPLEMENTARY BIBLIOGRAPHY

The fundamental work on the measure-theoretic approach to probability theory is A. N. Kolmogorov’s Grundbegriffe der Wahrscheinlichkeitsrechnung, of which the present work is an English translation. It is not an overstatement to say that for the past twenty-three years most of the research work in probability has been influenced by this approach, and that the axiomatic theory advanced by Kolmogorov is considered by workers in probability and statistics to be the correct one.

The publication of Kolmogorov’s Grundbegriffe initiated a new era in the theory of probability and its methods ; and the amount of research generated by the fundamental concepts due to Kolmogorov has been very great indeed. In preparing this second edition of the English translation of Kolmogorov’s monograph, it seemed desirable to give a bibliography that would in some way reflect the present status and direction of research activity in the theory of probability.

In recent years many excellent books have appeared. Three of most outstanding in this group are those by Doob [12], Feller [17], and Loève [54]. Other books dealing with general probability theory, and specialized topics in probability are: [2], [3], [6], [7], [9], [19], [23], [26], [27], [28], [34], [39], [41], [42], [47], [49], [50], [67], [70], [72]. Since these books contain many references to the literature, an attempt will be made in this bibliography to list some of the research papers that have appeared in the past few years and several that are in the course of publication.

The model developed by Kolmogorov can be briefly described as follows: In every situation (that is, an experiment, observation, etc.) in which random factors enter, there is an associated probability space or triple (Ω, ξ, p), where Ω is an abstract space (the space of elementary events), ξ is a σ-algebra of subsets of Ω (the sets of events), and p(E) is a measure (the probability of the event E) defined for E ε ξ, and satisfying the condition p(Ω) = 1. The Kolmogorov model has recently been discussed by Loś [56], who considers the use of abstract algebras and σ-algebras of sets instead of algebras and σ-algebras. Kolmogorov [44] has also considered the use of metric Boolean algebras in probability.

There are many problems, especially in theoretical physics, that do not fit into the Kolmogorov theory, the reason being that these problems involve unbounded measures. Rényi [68] has developed a general axiomatic theory of probability (which contains Kolmogorov’s theory as a special case) in which unbounded measures are allowed. The fundamental concept in this theory is the conditional probability of an event. Császár [10] has studied the measure-theoretic structure of the conditional probability spaces that occur in Rényi’s theory.

In another direction, examples have been given by various authors which point up the fact that Kolmogorov’s theory is too general. Gnedenko and Kolmogorov [27] have introduced a more restricted concept which has been termed a perfect probability space. A perfect probability space is a triple (Ω, ξ, p) such that for any real-valued ξ-measurable function g and any linear set B for which {ω : g(ω) ε B) ω ξ, there is a Borel set D ω B such that P{ω : g(ω) ε D} = P{ω : g (ω) ε B}. Recently, Blackwell [5] has introduced a concept that is more restricted than that of a perfect space. The concept introduced is that of a Lusin space. A Lusin space is a pair (Ω, ξ) such that (a) ξ is separable, and (b) the range of every real-valued ξ-measurable function g on Ω is an analytic set. It has been shown that if (Ω, ξ, p) is a Lusin space and p any probability measure on ξ, then (Ω, ξ, p) is a perfect probability space.

In § 6 of Chap. I, Kolmogorov gives the definition of a Markov chain. In recent years the theory of Markov chains and processes has been one of the most active areas of research in probability. An excellent introduction to this theory is given in [17]. Other references are [2], [3], [6], [12], [19], [23], [26], [34], [39], [50], [54], [67], [70], [72]. Two papers of interest are those of Harris and Robbins [29] on the ergodic theory of Markov chains, and Chung [8] on the theory of continuous parameter processes with a denumerable number of states. The paper by Chung unifies and extends the results due to Doob (cf. [12]) and Lévy [51], [52], [53].

A number of workers in probability are utilizing the theory of semi-groups [30] in the study of Markov processes and their structural properties [63]. In this approach, due primarily to Yosida [80], a one-parameter (discrete or continuous) semigroup of operators from a Banach space to itself defines the Markov process. Hille [32] and Kato [38] have used semi-group methods to integrate the Kolmogorov differential equations, and Kendall and Reuter [40] have investigated several pathological cases arising in the theory. Feller [18] and Hille [31] have studied the parabolic differential equations arising in the continuous case. Doob [13] has employed martingale theory in the semi-group approach to one-dimensional diffusion processes. Also, Hunt [33] has studied semi-groups of (probability) measures on Lie groups.

Recently several papers have appeared which are devoted to a more abstract approach to probability and consider random variables with values in a topological space which may have an algebraic structure. In [14], [21], [22], [58], [59], and [61], problems associated with Banach-space-valued random variables are considered; and in [4] similar problems are considered for Orlicz (generalized Lebesgue) spaces. Robbins [69] has considered random variables with values in any compact topological group. Segal [75] has studied the structure of probability algebras and has used this algebraic approach to extend Kolmogorov’s theorem concerning the existence of real-valued random variables having any preassigned joint distribution (cf. § 4 of Chap. III). Segal [76, Chap. 3, § 13] has also considered a non-commutative probability theory.

Prohorov [66] has studied convergence properties of probability distributions defined on Banach spaces and other function spaces. These problems have been considered also by LeCam [48] and Parzen [64].

The measure-theoretic definition and basic properties of conditional probabilities and conditional expectations have been given by Kolmogorov (Chap. IV; cf. also [12] and [54]). Using an abstract approach, S. T. C. Moy [60] has considered the properties of conditional expectation as a linear transformation of the space of all extended real-valued measurable functions on a probability space into itself. In [61] she considers the conditional expectation of Banach-space-valued random variables. Nakamura and Turamuru [62] consider an expectation as a given operation of a C*-algebra; and Umegaki [79] considers conditional expectation as a mapping of a space of measurable operators belonging to a L1-integrable class associated with a certain W*-algebra into itself. The work of Umegaki is concerned with the development of a non-commutative probability theory. The results of Segal [74], Dye [15], and others, in abstract integration theory are utilized in the above studies. Other papers of interest are [1], [16], [36], and [45].

The L. Schwartz theory of distributions [73] has been utilized by Gel’fand [24] in the study of generalized stochastic processes; and by Fortet [20] and Itô [35] in the study of random distributions.

Several books devoted to the study of limit theorems in probability are available : [27], [42], [47], and [49]. In addition, [12] and [54] should be consulted. Research and review papers of interest are [11], [14], [25], [37], [46], [55], [57], [65], [71], [77], and [78].

SUPPLEMENTARY BIBLIOGRAPHY

[1] ALDA, V., On Conditional Expectations, Czechoslovak Math. J., Vol. 5 (1955), pp. 503–505.

[2] ARLEY, N., On the Theory of Stochastic Processes and Their Application to the Theory of Cosmic Radiation, Copenhagen, 1943.

[3] BARTLETT, M. S., An Introduction to Stochastic Processes, Cambridge, 1955.

[4] BHARUCHA-REID, A. T., On Random Elements in Orlicz Spaces, (Abstract) Bull. Amer. Math. Soc., Vol. 62 (1956). To appear.

[5] BLACKWELL, D., On a Class of Probability Spaces, Proc. Third Berkeley Symposium on Math. Statistics and Probability, Vol. 2 (1956). To appear.

[6] BLANC-LAPIERRE, A., and R. Fortet, Théorie des fonctions aléatoires, Paris, 1953.

[7] BOCHNER, S., Harmonic Analysis and the Theory of Probability, Berkeley and Los Angeles, 1955.

[8] CHUNG, K. L., Foundations of the Theory of Continuous Parameter Markov Chains, Proc. Third Berkeley Symposium on Math. Statistics and Probabiilty, Vol. 2 (1956). To appear.

[9] CRAMÉR, H., Mathematical Methods of Statistics, Princeton, 1946.

[10] CSÁSZÁR, A., Sur le structure des espace de probabilité conditionnelle, Acta Math. Acad. Sci. Hung., Vol. 6 (1955), pp. 337–361.

[11] DERMAN, C., and H. ROBBINS, The Strong Law of Large Numbers when the First Moment does not Exist, Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. U.S.A., Vol. 41 (1955), pp.586–587.

[12] DOOB, J. L., Stochastic Processes, New York, 1953.

[13] DOOB, J. L., Martingales and One-Dimensional Diffusion, Trans. Amer. Math. Soc., Vol. 78 (1955), pp. 168–208.

[14] DOSS, S., Sur le théorème limite central pour des variables aléatoires dans espace de Banach, Publ. Inst. Statist. Univ. Paris, Vol. 3 (1954), pp. 143–148.

[15] DYE, H. A., The Radon-Nikodym Theorem for Finite Rings of Operators, Trans. Amer. Math. Soc., 72 (1952), pp. 243–280.

[16] FABIÁN, V., A Note on the Conditional Expectations, Czechoslovak Math. J., Vol. 4 (1954), pp. 187–191.

[17] FELLER, W., An Introduction to Probability Theory and Its Applications, New York, 1950.

[18] FELLER, W., Diffusion Processes in One Dimension, Trans. Amer. Math. Soc., Vol. 77 (1954), pp. 1–31.

[19] FORTET, R., Calcul des probabilités, Paris, 1950.

[20] FORTET, R., Random Distributions with an Application to Telephone Engineering, Proc. Third Berkeley Symposium on Math. Statistics and Probability, Vol. 2 (1956). To appear.

[21] FORTET, R., and E. MOURIER, Résultats complémentaires sur les éléments aléatoires prenant leurs valeurs dans un espace de Banach, Bull. Sci. Math. (2), Vol. 78 (1954), pp. 14–30.

[22] FORTET, R., and E. MOURIER, Les fonctions aléatoires comme éléments aléatoires dans les espace de Banach, Stud. Math., Vol. 15 (1955), pp. 62–79.

[23] FRECHET, M., Recherches théoriques modernes sur le calcul des probabilités. II. Méthode des fonctions arbitraires. Théorie des événements en chaine dans d’un nombre fini d’états possibles, Paris, 1938.

[24] GEL’FAND, I. M., Generalized Random Processes, Doklady Akad. Nauk SSSR (N.S.), Vol. 100 (1955), pp. 853–856. [In Russian.]

[25] GIHMAN, I. L., Some Limit Theorems for Conditional Distributions, Doklady Akad. Nauk SSSR (N.S.), Vol. 91 (1953), pp. 1003–1006. [In Russian.]

[26] GNEDENKO, B. V., Course in the Theory of Probability, Moscow-Leningrad, 1950. [In Russian.]

[27] GNEDENKO, B. V., and A. N. KOLMOGOROV, Limit Distributions for Sums of Independent Random Variables, Translated by K. L. Chung with an appendix by J. L. Doob, Cambridge, 1954.

[28] HALMOS, P. R., Measure Theory, New York, 1950.

[29] HARRIS, T. E., and H. ROBBINS, Ergodic Theory of Markov Chains Admitting an Infinite Invariant Measure, Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. U.S.A., Vol. 39 (1953), pp. 860–864.

[30] HILLE, E., Functional Analysis and Semi-Groups, New York, 1948.

[31] HILLE, E., On the Integration Problem for Fokker-Planck’s Equation in the Theory of Stochastic Processes, Onzième congrès des math. scand. (1949), pp. 185–194.

[32] HILLE, E., On the Integration of Kolmogoroff’s Differential Equations, Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. U.S.A., Vol. 40 (1954), pp. 20–25.

[33] HUNT, G. A., Semi-Groups of Measures on Lie Groups, Trans. Amer. Math. Soc., Vol. 81 (1956), pp. 264–293.

[34] ITÔ, K., Theory of Probability, Tokyo, 1953.

[35] ITÔ, K., Stationary Random Distributions, Mem. Coll. Sci. Univ. Kyoto, Ser. A. Math., Vol. 28 (1954), pp. 209–223.

[36] JIŘINA, M., Conditional Probabilities on Strictly Separable σ-Algebras, Czechoslovak Math. J., Vol. 4 (1954), pp. 372–380. [In Czech.]

[37] KALLIANPUR, G., On a Limit Theorem for Dependent Random Variables, Doklady Akad. Nauk SSSR (N.S.) Vol. 101 (1955), pp. 13–16. [In Russian.]

[38] KATO, T., On the Semi-Groups Generated by Kolmogoroff’s Differential Equations, J. Math. Soc. Japan, Vol. 6 (1954), pp. 1–15.

[39] KAWADA, Y., The Theory of Probabiilty, Tokyo, 1952.

[40] KENDALL, D. G., and G. E. H. REUTER, Some Pathological Markov Processes with a Denumerable Infinity of States and the Associated Semigroups of Transformations in l, Proc. Symp. on Stochastic Processes (Amsterdam), 1954. To appear.

[41] KHINTCHINE, A., Asymptotische Gesetze der Wahrscheinlichkeitsrechnung, Berlin, 1933. [Reprint, CHELSEA PUBLISHING COMPANY.]

[42] KHINTCHINE, A., Limit Laws of Sums of Independent Random Variables, Moscow-Leningrad, 1938. [In Russian.]

[43] KOLMOGOROV, A., Grundbegriffe der Wahrscheinlichkeitsrechnung, Berlin, 1933. [The present work is an English translation of this.]

[44] KOLMOGOROV, A., Algèbres de Boole métriques complètes, VI Zjazd Mat. Pols., Warsaw (1948), pp. 21–30.

[45] KOLMOGOROV, A., A Theorem on the Convergence of Conditional Mathematical Expectations and Some of Its Applications, Comptes Rendus du Premier Congrès des Mathématiciens Hongrois (1952), pp. 367–386. [In Russian and Hungarian.]

[46] KOLMOGOROV, A., Some Work of Recent Years in the Field of Limit Theorems in the Theory of Probability, Vestnik Moskov. Univ. Ser. Fiz.-Mat. Estest. Nauk, Vol. 8 (1953), pp. 29–38.

[47] KUNISAWA, K., Limit Theorems in Probability Theory, Tokyo, 1949.

[48] LECAM, L., Convergence in Distribution of Stochastic Processes, Univ. California Publ. Statistics. To appear.

[49] LEVY, P., Théorie de l’addition des variables aléatoires, Paris, 1937.

[50] LEVY, P., Processus stochastiques et mouvement Brownien, Paris, 1948.

[51] LEVY, P., Systèmes markoviens et stationnaires. Cas dénombrable, Ann. Sci. Ecole Norm. Sup., Vol. 68 (1951), pp. 327–401.

[52] LEVY, P., Complément à l’étude des processus de Markoff, Ann. Sci. Ecole Norm. Sup., Vol. 69 (1952), pp. 203–212.

[53] LEVY, P., Processus markoviens et stationnaires du cinquieme type (infinité denombrable d’états possibles, paramètre continu), C. R. Acad. Sci. Paris, Vol. 236 (1953), pp. 1630–1632.

[54] LOÈVE, M., Probability Theory, New York, 1955.

[55] LOÈVE, M., Variational Terms and the Central Limit Problem, Proc. Third Berkeley Symposium on Math. Statistics and Probability, Vol. 2 (1956). To appear.

[56] LOS, J., On the Axiomatic Treatment of Probability, Colloq Math., Vol. 3 (1955), pp.125–137.

[57] MARSAGLIA, G., Iterated Limits and the Central Limit Theorem for Dependent Variables, Proc. Amer. Math. Soc., Vol. 5 (1954), pp. 987–991.

[58] MOURIER, E., Eléments aléatoires dans un espace de Banach, Ann. Inst. H. Poincare, Vol. 13 (1953), pp. 161–244.

[59] MOURIER, E., L-Random Elements and L-Random Elements in Banach Spaces, Proc. Berkeley Symposium on Math. Statistics and Probability, Vol. 2 (1956). To appear.

[60] MOY, S. T. C., Characterizations of Conditional Expectation as a Transformation on Function Spaces, Pacific J. Math., Vol. 4 (1954), pp. 47–63.

[61] MOY, S. T. C., Conditional Expectations of Banach Space Valued Random Variables and Their Properties, (Abstract) Bull. Amer. Math. Soc., Vol. 62 (1956). To appear.

[62] NAKAMURA, M. and T. TURUMARU, Expectation in an Operator Algebra, Tôhoku Math. J., Vol. 6 (1954), pp. 182–188.

[63] NEVEU, J., Etude des semi-groups de Markoff, (Thesis) Paris, 1955.

[64] PARZEN, E., Convergence in Distribution and Fourier-Stieltjes Transforms of Random Functions, (Abstract) Ann. Math. Statistics, Vol. 26 (1955), p. 771.

[65] PARZEN, E., A Central Limit Theorem for Multilinear Stochastic Processes, (Abstract) Ann. Math. Statistics, Vol. 27 (1956), p. 206.

[66] PROHOROV, Yu. V., Probability Distributions in Functional Spaces, Uspehi Matem. Nauk (N.S.), Vol. 8 (1953), pp. 165–167. [In Russian.]

[67] RENYI, A., The Calculus of Probabilities, Budapest, 1954. [In Hungarian.]

[68] RENYI, A., On a New Axiomatic Theory of Probability, Acta Math. Acad. Sci. Hung., Vol. 6 (1955), pp. 285–335.

[69] ROBBINS, H., On the Equidistribution of Sums of Independent Random Variables, Proc. Amer. Math. Soc., Vol. 4 (1953), pp. 786–799.

[70] ROMANOVSKI, V. I., Discrete Markov Chains, Moscow-Leningrad, 1949. [In Russian.]

[71] ROSENBLATT, M., A Central Limit Theorem and a Strong Mixing Condition, Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. U.S.A., Vol. 42 (1956), pp. 43–47.

[72] SARYMSAKOV, T. A., Elements of the Theory of Markov Processes, Moscow, 1954. [In Russian.]

[73] SCHWARTZ, L., Théorie des distributions, Paris, 1950–51.

[74] SEGAL, I. E., A Non-Commutative Extension of Abstract Integration, Ann. Math. Vol. 57 (1953), pp. 401–457.

[75] SEGAL, I. E., Abstract Probability Spaces and a Theorem of Kolmogoroff, Amer. J. Math., Vol. 76 (1954), pp. 177–181.

[76] SEGAL, I. E., A Mathematical Approach to Elementary Particles and Their Fields, University of Chicago, 1955. [Mimeographed Lecture Notes.]

[77] TAKANO, K., On Some Limit Theorems of Probability Distributions, Ann. Inst. Statist. Math., Tokyo, Vol. 6 (1954), pp. 37–113.

[78] TSURUMI, S., On the Strong Law of Large Numbers, Tôhoku Math. J., Vol. 7 (1955), pp. 166–170.

[79] UMEGAKI, H., Conditional Expectation in an Operator Algebra, Tôhoku Math. J., Vol. 6 (1954), pp. 177–181.

[80] YOSIDA, K., Operator Theoretical Treatment of the Markoff’s Process, Proc. Imp. Acad. Japan, Vol. 14 (1938), pp. 363–367.

www.doverpublications.com

