# 参考文献

## 01　基因的秘密

Avery, O. T.，MacLeod, C.M.，and McCarty, M.（1944）.Studies on the chemical nature of the substance inducing transformation of pneumococcal types：induction of transformation by a desoxyribonucleic acid fraction isolated from pneumococcus type III.J Exp Med 79，137-158.

Cobb, M.（2006）. Heredity before genetics：a history.Nat Rev Genet 7，953-958.

Cobb, M.（2014）. Oswald Avery, DNA, and the transformation of biology.Curr Biol 24，R55-R60.

Cobb, M.（2016）. A Speculative History of DNA：What If Oswald Avery Had Died in 1934?PLoS Biol 14，e2001197.

Davenport, C. B.（1937）.Home of the Ancon Sheep.Science 86，422-422.

Diamond, J.（1997）. Guns, Germs, and Steel：The Fates of Human Societies（W.W.Norton）.

Eichmann, K.，and Krause, R. M.（2013）.Fred Neufeld and pneumococcal serotypes：foundations for the discovery of the transforming principle.Cell Mol Life Sci 70，2225-2236.

Franklin, R. E.，and Gosling, R.G.（1953）.Molecular configuration in sodium thymonucleate.Nature 171，740-741.

Griffth, F.（1928）. The Signifcance of Pneumococcal Types.J Hyg（Lond）27，113-159.

Harari, Y.（2014）. Sapiens：A Brief History of Humankind（Harper）.

Hartl, D.，and Jones, E.（2005）. Genetics：Analysis of Genes and Genomes（Jones&Barlett）.

Hershey, A. D.，and Chase, M.（1952）.Independent functions of viral protein and nucleic acid in growth of baceriophage.J Gen Physiol 36，39-56.

Judson, H. F.（1996）.The Eighth Day of Creation：Makers of the Revolution in Biology（Touchstone Books）.

Leder, P.（2010）. Marshall Warren Nirenberg（1927-2010）.Science 327，972-972.

Leder, P.，and Nirenberg, M. W.（1964）.RNA codewords and protein synthesis, III.The nucleotide sequence of a cysteine and a leucine RNA codeword.Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 52，1521-1529.

Lorenz, M. G.，and Wackernagel, W.（1994）.Bacterial gene transfer by natural genetic transformation in the environment.Microbiol Rev 58，563-602.

McCarty, M.（2003）. Discovering genes are made of DNA.Nature 421，406-406.

Meselson, M.，and Stahl, F. W.（1958）.The replication of DNA in Escherichia coli.Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 44，671-682.

Watson, J. D.，and Crick, F.H.（1953）.Molecular structure of nucleic acids；a structure for deoxyribose nucleic acid.Nature 171，737-738.

Wilkins, M. H.，Stokes, A.R.，and Wilson, H.R.（1953）.Molecular structure of deoxypentose nucleic acids.Nature 171，738-740.

Witting, L.（2008）. Inevitable evolution：back to the origin and beyond the 20th century paradigm of contingent evolution by historical natural selection.Biol Rev Camb Philos Soc 83，259-294.

## 02　给基因动手术

Anderson, W. F.（1990）.September 14，1990：The Beginning.Hum Gene Ther 1，371-372.

Blaese, R. M.，Culver, K.W.，Anderson, W.F.，Nienhuis, A.，Dunbar, C.，Chang, L.，Mullen, C.，Carter, C.，Leitman, S.，Berger, M.，et al.（1993）.Treatment of Severe Combined Immunodeficiency Disease（SCID）due to Adenosine Deaminase Deficiency with CD34+Selected Autologous Peripheral Blood Cells Transduced with a Human ADA Gene（Amendment）.National Institutes of Health.Hum Gene Ther 4，521-527.

Blaese, R. M.，Culver, K.W.，Miller, A.D.，Carter, C.S.，Fleisher, T.，Clerici, M.，Shearer, G.，Chang, L.，Chiang, Y.，Tolstoshev, P.，et al.（1995）.T Lymphocyte-Directed Gene Therapy forADA−SCID：Initial Trial Results After 4 Years.Science 270，475-480.

Bryant, L. M.，Christopher, D.M.，Giles, A.R.，Hinderer, C.，Rodriguez, J.L.，Smith, J.B.，Traxler, E.A.，Tycko, J.，Wojno, A.P.，and Wilson, J.M.（2013）.Lessons Learned from the Clinical Development and Market Authorization of Glybera.Hum Gene Ther Clin Dev 24，55-64.

Bunn, H. F.（1997）.Pathogenesis and Treatment of Sickle Cell Disease.N Engl J Med 337，762-769.

Cepko, C. L.，Roberts, B.E.，and Mulligan, R.C.（1984）.Construction and applications of a highly transmissible murine retrovirus shuttle vector.Cell 37，1053-1062.

Cohen, S. N.（2013）.DNA cloning：A personal view after 40 years.Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 110，15521-15529.

Cohen, S. N.，Chang, A.C.Y.，Boyer, H.W.，and Helling, R.B.（1973）.Construction of Biologically Functional Bacterial Plasmids In Vitro.Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 70，3240-3244.

Cuthbert, A. W.，Halstead, J.，Ratcliff, R.，Colledge, W.H.，and Evans, M.J.（1995）.The genetic advantage hypothesis in cystic fbrosis heterozygotes：a murine study.J Physiol 482，449-454.

Dolgin, E.（2015）. The myopia boom.Nature 519.

Frank, K. M.，Hogarth, D.K.，Miller, J.L.，Mandal, S.，Mease, P.J.，Samulski, R.J.，Weisgerber, G.A.，and Hart, J.（2009）.Investigation of the Cause of Death in a Gene-Therapy Trial.N Engl J Med 361，161-169.

Friedmann, T.，and Roblin, R.（1972）. Gene Therapy for Human Genetic Disease?Science 175，949-955.

Gabriel, S. E.，Brigman, K.N.，Koller, B.H.，Boucher, R.C.，and Stutts, M.J.（1994）.Cystic fbrosis heterozygote resistance to cholera toxin in the cystic fbrosis mouse model.Science 266，107-109.

Hacein-Bey-Abina, S.，Garrigue, A.，Wang, G. P.，Soulier, J.，Lim, A.，Morillon, E.，Clappier, E.，Caccavelli, L.，Delabesse, E.，Beldjord, K.，et al.（2008）.Insertional oncogenesis in 4 patients after retrovirus-mediated gene therapy of SCID-X1.J Clin Invest 118，3132-3142.

Hütter, G.，Bodor, J.，Ledger, S.，Boyd, M.，Millington, M.，Tsie, M.，and Symonds, G.（2015）.CCR5 Targeted Cell Therapy for HIV and Prevention of Viral Escape.Viruses 7，4186-4203.

Hütter, G.，Nowak, D.，Mossner, M.，Ganepola, S.，Müßig, A.，Allers, K.，Schneider, T.，Hofmann, J.，Kücherer, C.，Blau, O.，et al.（2009）.Long-Term Control of HIV by CCR5 Delta32/Delta32 Stem-Cell Transplantation.N Engl J Med 360，692-698.

Rees, D. C.，Williams, T.N.，and Gladwin, M.T.（2010）.Sickle-cell disease.Lancet 376，2018-2031.

Wirth, T.，Parker, N.，and Ylä-Herttuala, S.（2013）.History of gene therapy.Gene 525，162-169.

## 03　黄金手指

Bibikova, M.，Golic, M.，Golic, K. G.，and Carroll, D.（2002）.Targeted chromosomal cleavage and mutagenesis in Drosophila using zinc-fnger nucleases.Genetics 161，1169-1175.

Chandrasegaran, S.，and Carroll, D.（2016）. Origins of Programmable Nucleases for Genome Engineering.J Mol Biol 428，963-989.

Cheng, L.，Blazar, B.，High, K.，and Porteus, M.（2011）. Zinc fngers hit off target.Nat Med 17，1192-1193.

Churchill, M. E.，Tullius, T.D.，and Klug, A.（1990）.Mode of interaction of the zinc fnger protein TFIIIA with a 5S RNA gene of Xenopus.Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 87，5528-5532.

Doyon, Y.，Vo, T. D.，Mendel, M.C.，Greenberg, S.G.，Wang, J.，Xia, D.F.，Miller, J.C.，Urnov, F.D.，Gregory, P.D.，and Holmes, M.C.（2011）.Enhancing zinc-fnger-nuclease activity with improved obligate heterodimeric architectures.Nat Meth 8，74-79.

Engelke, D. R.，Ng, S.-Y.，Shastry, B.S.，and Roeder, R.G.（1980）.Specifc interaction of a purifed transcription factor with an internal control region of 5S RNA genes.Cell 19，717-728.

Ginsberg, A. M.，King, B.O.，and Roeder, R.G.（1984）.Xenopus 5S gene transcription factor, TFIIIA：Characterization of a cDNA clone and measurement of RNA levels throughout development.Cell 39，479-489.

Kandavelou, K.，Mani, M.，Durai, S.，and Chandrasegaran, S.（2005）.'Magic'scissors for genome surgery. Nat Biotech 23，686-687.

Kim, Y. G.，Cha, J.，and Chandrasegaran, S.（1996）.Hybrid restriction enzymes：zinc fnger fusions to Fok I cleavage domain.Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 93，1156-1160.

Klug, A.（2010）. The Discovery of Zinc Fingers and Their Applications in Gene Regulation and Genome Manipulation.Annu Rev Biochem 79，213-231.

Klug, A.，and Rhodes, D.（1987）. Zinc Fingers：A Novel Protein Fold for Nucleic Acid Recognition.Cold Spring Harb Symp Quant Biol 52，473-482.

Lu, T. K.，Chandrasegaran, S.，and Hodak, H.（2016）.The Era of Synthetic Biology and Genome Engineering：Where No Man Has Gone Before.J Mol Biol 428，835-836.

Miller, J. C.，Holmes, M.C.，Wang, J.，Guschin, D.Y.，Lee, Y.-L.，Rupniewski, I.，Beausejour, C.M.，Waite, A.J.，Wang, N.S.，Kim, K.A.，et al.（2007）.An improved zinc-fnger nuclease architecture for highly specifc genome editing.Nat Biotech 25，778-785.

Moore, M.，Choo, Y.，and Klug, A.（2001）. Design of polyzinc finger peptides with structured linkers.Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 98，1432-1436.

Porteus, M. H.，and Baltimore, D.（2003）.Chimeric Nucleases Stimulate Gene Targeting in Human Cells.Science 300，763-763.

Tebas, P.，Stein, D.，Tang, W. W.，Frank, I.，Wang, S.Q.，Lee, G.，Spratt, S.K.，Surosky, R.T.，Giedlin, M.A.，Nichol, G.，et al.（2014）.Gene Editing of CCR5 in Autologous CD4 T Cells of Persons Infected with HIV.N Engl J Med 370，901-910.

Walker, F. O.（2007）.Huntington's disease.Lancet 369，218-228.

Watson, J. D.，Baker, T.A.，Bell, S.P.，Gann, A.，Levine, M.，and Losick, R.（2004）.Molecular Biology of the Gene（Pearson Benjamin Cummings）.

## 04　编程时代

Barrangou, R.，Fremaux, C.，Deveau, H.，Richards, M.，Boyaval, P.，Moineau, S.，Romero, D. A.，and Horvath, P.（2007）.CRISPR Provides Acquired Resistance Against Viruses in Prokaryotes.Science 315，1709-1712.

Boch, J.，and Bonas, U.（2010）. Xanthomonas AvrBs3 Family-Type III Effectors：Discovery and Function.Annual Review of Phytopathology 48，419-436.

Boch, J.，Scholze, H.，Schornack, S.，Landgraf, A.，Hahn, S.，Kay, S.，Lahaye, T.，Nickstadt, A.，and Bonas, U.（2009）. Breaking the Code of DNA Binding Specifcity of TAL-Type III Effectors.Science 326，1509-1512.

Büttner, D.，and Bonas, U.（2002）.NEW EMBO MEMBER’S REVIEW：Getting across—bacterial type III effector proteins on their way to the plant cell.EMBO J 21，5313-5322.

Cathomen, T.，and Keith Joung, J.（2008）. Zinc-finger Nucleases：The Next Generation Emerges.Mol Ther 16，1200-1207.

Cong, L.，Ran, F. A.，Cox, D.，Lin, S.，Barretto, R.，Habib, N.，Hsu, P.D.，Wu, X.，Jiang, W.，Marraffni, L.A.，et al.（2013）.Multiplex Genome Engineering Using CRISPR/Cas Systems.Science 339，819-823.

Egelie, K. J.，Graff, G.D.，Strand, S.P.，and Johansen, B.（2016）.The emerging patent landscape of CRISPR-Cas gene editing technology.Nat Biotech 34，1025-1031.

Fellmann, C.，Gowen, B. G.，Lin, P.-C.，Doudna, J.A.，and Corn, J.E.（2017）.Cornerstonesof CRISPR-Cas in drug discovery and therapy.Nat Rev Drug Discov 16，89-100.

Foley, J. E.，Yeh, J.-R.J.，Maeder, M.L.，Reyon, D.，Sander, J.D.，Peterson, R.T.，and Joung, J.K.（2009）.Rapid Mutation of Endogenous Zebrafsh Genes Using Zinc Finger Nucleases Made by Oligomerized Pool ENgineering（OPEN）.PLoS ONE 4，e4348.

Jinek, M.，Chylinski, K.，Fonfara, I.，Hauer, M.，Doudna, J. A.，and Charpentier, E.（2012）.A Programmable Dual-RNA-Guided DNA Endonuclease in Adaptive Bacterial Immunity.Science 337，816-821.

Jinek, M.，East, A.，Cheng, A.，Lin, S.，Ma, E.，and Doudna, J.（2013）. RNA-programmed genome editing in human cells.eLife 2，e00471.

Kay, S.，Hahn, S.，Marois, E.，Hause, G.，and Bonas, U.（2007）. A Bacterial Effector Acts as a Plant Transcription Factor and Induces a Cell Size Regulator.Science 318，648-651.

Kupecz, A.（2014）. Who owns CRISPR-Cas9 in Europe?Nat Biotech 32，1194-1196.

Lander, Eric S.（2016）. The Heroes of CRISPR.Cell 164，18-28.

Maeder, M. L.，Thibodeau-Beganny, S.，Osiak, A.，Wright, D.A.，Anthony, R.M.，Eichtinger, M.，Jiang, T.，Foley, J.E.，Winfrey, R.J.，Townsend, J.A.，et al.（2008）.Rapid“open-source”engineering of customized zinc-fnger nucleases for highly effcient gene modifcation.Mol Cell 31，294-301.

Mali, P.，Yang, L.，Esvelt, K. M.，Aach, J.，Guell, M.，DiCarlo, J.E.，Norville, J.E.，and Church, G.M.（2013）.RNA-Guided Human Genome Engineering via Cas9.Science 339，823-826.

Miller, J. C.，Tan, S.，Qiao, G.，Barlow, K.A.，Wang, J.，Xia, D.F.，Meng, X.，Paschon, D.E.，Leung, E.，Hinkley, S.J.，et al.（2011）.A TALE nuclease architecture for efficient genome editing.Nat Biotech 29，143-148.

Mojica, F. J.M.，Díez-Villaseñor, C.s.，García-Martínez, J.，and Soria, E.（2005）.Intervening Sequences of Regularly Spaced Prokaryotic Repeats Derive from Foreign Genetic Elements.J Mol Evol 60，174-182.

Mojica, F. J.M.，and Rodriguez-Valera, F.（2016）.The discovery of CRISPR in archaea and bacteria.FEBS J 283，3162-3169.

Moscou, M. J.，and Bogdanove, A.J.（2009）.A Simple Cipher Governs DNA Recognition by TAL Effectors.Science 326，1501-1501.

Reardon, S.（2016）. CRISPR heavyweights battle in US patent court.Nature 540.

Römer, P.，Hahn, S.，Jordan, T.，Strauß，T.，Bonas, U.，and Lahaye, T.（2007）.Plant Pathogen Recognition Mediated by Promoter Activation of the Pepper Bs3 Resistance Gene.Science 318，645-648.

Sander, J. D.，Dahlborg, E.J.，Goodwin, M.J.，Cade, L.，Zhang, F.，Cifuentes, D.，Curtin, S.J.，Blackburn, J.S.，Thibodeau-Beganny, S.，Qi, Y.，et al.（2011）.Selection-Free Zinc-Finger Nuclease Engineering by Context-Dependent Assembly（CoDA）.Nat Meth 8，67-69.

Sherkow, J. S.（2015）.Law, history and lessons in the CRISPR patent confict.Nat Biotech 33，256-257.

Van den Ackerveken, G.，Marois, E.，and Bonas, U.（1996）. Recognition of the Bacterial Avirulence Protein AvrBs3 Occurs inside the Host Plant Cell.Cell 87，1307-1316.

Zhang, F.，Cong, L.，Lodato, S.，Kosuri, S.，Church, G. M.，and Arlotta, P.（2011）.Effcient construction of sequence-specifc TAL effectors for modulating mammalian transcription.Nat Biotech 29，149-153.

## 05　未来，和未来的未来

Bosley, K. S.，Botchan, M.，Bredenoord, A.L.，Carroll, D.，Charo, R.A.，Charpentier, E.，Cohen, R.，Corn, J.，Doudna, J.，Feng, G.，et al.（2015）.CRISPR germline engineering[mdash]the community speaks.Nat Biotech 33，478-486.

Cyranoski, D.（2016）. Chinese scientists to pioneer frst human CRISPR trial.Nature 535.

Demorest, Z. L.，Coffman, A.，Baltes, N.J.，Stoddard, T.J.，Clasen, B.M.，Luo, S.，Retterath, A.，Yabandith, A.，Gamo, M.E.，Bissen, J.，et al.（2016）.Direct stacking of sequence-specifc nuclease-induced mutations to produce high oleic and low linolenic soybean oil.BMC Plant Biol 16，225.

Evitt, N. H.，Mascharak, S.，and Altman, R.B.（2015）.Human Germline CRISPR-Cas Modifcation：Toward a Regulatory Framework.Am J Bioeth 15，25-29.

Hildt, E.（2016）. Human Germline Interventions-Think First.Front Genet 7，81.

LaBarbera, A. R.（2016）.Proceedings of the International Summit on Human Gene Editing：a global discussion—Washington, D.C.，December 1-3，2015.J Assist Reprod Genet 33，1123-1127.

Ledford, H.（2016）. Gene-editing surges as US rethinks regulations.Nature 532.

Liang, P.，Xu, Y.，Zhang, X.，Ding, C.，Huang, R.，Zhang, Z.，Lv, J.，Xie, X.，Chen, Y.，Li, Y.，et al.（2015）. CRISPR/Cas9-mediated gene editing in human tripronuclear zygotes.Protein Cell 6，363-372.

Marx, V.（2012）. Genome-editing tools storm ahead.Nat Meth 9，1055-1059.

Miller, H. I.（2015）.Recasting Asilomar's lessons for human germline editing.Nat Biotech 33，1132-1134.

Polymeropoulos, E. T.，Plouffe, D.，LeBlanc, S.，Elliott, N.G.，Currie, S.，and Frappell, P.B.（2014）.Growth hormone transgenesis and polyploidy increase metabolic rate, alter the cardiorespiratory response and influence HSP expression in response to acute hypoxia in Atlantic salmon（Salmo salar）yolk-sac alevins.J Exp Biol 217，2268-2276.

Reardon, S.（2015）. Leukaemia success heralds wave of gene-editing therapies.Nature 527.

Shen, H.（2013）. CRISPR technology leaps from lab to industry.Nature.

Stoddard, T. J.，Clasen, B.M.，Baltes, N.J.，Demorest, Z.L.，Voytas, D.F.，Zhang, F.，and Luo, S.（2016）.Targeted Mutagenesis in Plant Cells through Transformation of Sequence-Specifc Nuclease mRNA.PLoS ONE 11，e0154634.

Travis, J.（2015）. Germline editing dominates DNA summit.Science 350，1299-1300.

Waltz, E.（2016）. Gene-edited CRISPR mushroom escapes US regulation.Nature 532.

图1-1：http：//www.crystalinks.com/egyptfarming.jpg

图1-2：http：//voices.nationalgeographic.com/fles/2009/03/maize-and-wild-ancestor-comparison.jpg

图1-5：http：//www.yourarticlelibrary.com/wp-content/uploads/2014/02/clip_image0129.jpg

图1-7：http：//www.seasky.org/ocean-exploration/assets/images/beagle_voyage.png

图1-8：http：//forskning.no/sites/forskning.no/fles/blogg/darwin.jpg

图1-9：http：//photo.hanyu.iciba.com/upload/encyclopedia_2/76/36/bk_76366ee51589e5533ec35d e4cb8d48ca_GekGq1.jpg

图1-10：改编自http：//www.mun.ca/biology/scarr/MGA2-05-05smc.jpg

图1-11：改编自http：//www.mun.ca/biology/scarr/MGA2-05-05smc.jpg

图1-12：改编自http：//www.mun.ca/biology/scarr/MGA2-05-05smc.jpg

图1-13：改编自http：//www.mun.ca/biology/scarr/MGA2-05-05smc.jpg

图1-14：http：//users.rcn.com/jkimball.ma.ultranet/BiologyPages/C/Colonies_smooth.jpg

http://users.rcn.com/jkimball.ma.ultranet/BiologyPages/C/Colonies_rough.jpg

图1-15：改编自http：//timerime.com/user_fles/133/133637/media/image002.jpg

图1-16：http：//www.doctortee.com/dsu/tiftickjian/cse-img/genetics/molecular/avery-exp.jpg

图1-17：http：//imgarcade.com/1/meiosis-phases-microscope/

图1-18：http：//www.yourgenome.org/sites/default/files/images/illustrations/hershey_chase_experiment_yourgenome.png

图1-19：改编自http：//www.desktopclass.com/wp-content/uploads/2011/02/DNA_base_pairing-01_01_03a.jpg

图1-20：http：//study.com/cimages/multimages/16/Nitrogenous_bases.jpg

图1-21：http：//www.ba-education.com/dna/dnafour.jpg

图1-22：http：//www.nature.com/nature/journal/v421/n6921/images/nature01399-f1.2.jpg

图1-23：《双螺旋》（插图注释本）28-6

图1-24：改编自：http：//image.slidesharecdn.com/replication-131220144801-phpapp01/95/dna-replication-in-eukaryotes-and-prokaryotes-14-638.jpg?cb=1387551066

图1-25：改编自：http：//images.gutefrage.net/media/fragen/bilder/meselson-stahl-experiment——hilfe-qwq/0_big.jpg

图1-26：http：//adapaproject.org/images/biobook_images/A000161_Atpsynthase.jpg

图1-29：http：//www.michaelsharris.com/12ubio/pix/proteinsynthdogma.jpg

图2-1：http：//discovermagazine.com/～/media/Images/Issues/2015/jan-feb/sickle-cell-anemia.jpg

图2-2：https：//en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cystic_fbrosis#/media/File：ClubbingCF.JPG

图2-4：http：//www.nature.com/polopoly_fs/7.24477.1426508156！/image/Myopia2.jpg_gen/derivatives/landscape_630/Myopia2.jpg

图2-5：http：//learn.genetics.utah.edu/content/epigenetics/twins/images/twin_table.jpg

图2-6：http：//www.fredhutch.org/en/news/center-news/2015/02/timothy-ray-brown-doctor-who-cured-him/_jcr_content/articletext/textimage/image.img.jpg/1425085307923.jpg

图2-7：http：//static2.businessinsider.com/image/5058963969bedd0409000009/curing-the-disease-that-trapped-the-bubble-boy.jpg

图2-8：http：//www.biorewind.com/wp-content/uploads/2012/03/Recombinant-DNA.png

图2-9：http：//img.iknow.bdimg.com/zhidaoribao2014/2015year/0516/43.jpg

图2-10：http：//primaryimmune.org/wp-content/uploads/2013/09/First-Gene-Therapy-Patients-2013.jpg

图2-11：http：//vector.childrenshospital.org/wp-content/uploads/2014/05/Illustration-1-Gene-Therapy-Final-Draft_small_WAS_gene_therapy.jpg

图2-12：https：//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/c/c8/HIV_Genome_Org_wRRE.png

图2-13：http：//users.rcn.com/jkimball.ma.ultranet/BiologyPages/H/HIV_virion2.png

图2-14：http：//igtrcn.org/wp-content/uploads/2014/05/MLV.jpg

图2-15：http：//www.jesse-gelsinger.com/images/jesseportrait.jpg

图2-16：http：//res.news.ifeng.com/af0a411b01107b98/2011/1221/rdn_4ef1a5907fb2e.jpg

图2-17：http：//qtxasset.com/styles/max_325x325/s3fs/2016-05/Glybera.jpg?0XrZ6jiQVJnuK VeNlltR_OpIBAF9G9d5&itok=VQBAaT0v．

图3-1：http：//blogs.discovermagazine.com/neuroskeptic/fles/2010/10/huntingtons1.jpg

图3-2：http：//img.medicalxpress.com/newman/gfx/news/hires/2011/retrieve（4）.jpg

图3-4：http：//www.michaeleisen.org/blog/wp-content/uploads/2008/10/fps.png

图3-5：http：//images.fineartamerica.com/images-medium-large/transcription-factor-and-dna-molecules-phantatomix.jpg

图3-6：http：//www.rockefeller.edu/research/images/upload/headshots/RobertGRoeder.jpg

图3-7：http：//i.stack.imgur.com/kUMGe.gif

图3-8：http：//2011.igem.org/wiki/images/c/cb/HARV1985Miller_etal.png

图3-9：http：//2010.igem.org/wiki/images/thumb/a/a8/SLO_DNA_binding_domain_Zinc_fnger.jpg/550px-SLO_DNA_binding_domain_Zinc_fnger.jpg

图3-10：改编自http：//2010.igem.org/wiki/images/thumb/a/a8/SLO_DNA_binding_domain_Zinc_fnger.jpg/550px-SLO_DNA_binding_domain_Zinc_fnger.jpg

图3-11：http：//drugline.org/img/term/restriction-enzyme-12878_2.jpg

图3-12：http：//www.bioprocessintl.com/wp-content/uploads/2016/04/14-4sup-Brindley-F11.jpg

图3-13：http：//www.nature.com/nbt/journal/v32/n4/images/nbt.2842-F1.jpg

图3-15：http：//www.unemed.com/wp-content/uploads/2012/08/coca-cola.jpg

图3-16：http：//www.sh133.cn/uploadfle/2013/1220/20131220103619782.jpg

图3-17：http：//www.biotechniques.com/multimedia/archive/00249/BTN_A_000114284_O_F_249755b.jpg

图4-1：http：//www.bio-itworld.com/uploadedImages/Bio-IT_World/Top_Headlines/2014/01-Jan/joung.jpg

图4-2：http：//www.dfg.de/zentralablage/bilder/gefoerderte_projekte/preistraeger/gwl/gwl_2011/gwl_bonas.JPG

图4-3：http：//1.im.guokr.com/rUFFNMmh4qQUYFJgm11-xQFX9WMr6s1qJ6RRsDPsX4U2BA AA4AIAAEpQ.jpg?imageView2/1/w/600/h/409

图4-4：http：//geneeditingservice.com/images/TALEN2.png

图4-5：http：//bcs.mit.edu/sites/default/fles/featured-images/MIT-Gairdner-Feng-Zhang.jpg

图4-6：http：//www.nature.com/nrmicro/journal/v9/n6/images/nrmicro2577-f1.jpg

图4-7：http：//wwwuser.cnb.csic.es/～montoliu/CRISPR/Mojica_CRISPR.jpg

图4-8：http：//cen.acs.org/content/cen/articles/92/i39/Patent-Picks-CRISPRCas9-Gene-Editing/_jcr_content/articlebody/subpar/articlemedia_0.img.jpg/1411601991378.jpg

图4-9：http：//www4.pictures.zimbio.com/gi/Emmanuelle+Charpentier+Jennifer+Doudna+Breakth rough+41Nvzn0lLKzl.jpg

图4-10：www.broadinstitute.org）http：//patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-bool.html&r=1&f=G&l=50&co1=AND&d=PTXT&s1=8，697，359.PN.&OS=PN/8，697，359&RS=PN/8，697，359．

图4-11：http：//www.biotechniques.com/multimedia/archive/00167/ObamaSigningAmerica_167550a.bmp

图4-12：http：//www.videoeditingsage.com/images/Philo3.jpg

图5-1：http：//www.nature.com/polopoly_fs/7.10292.1367341943！/image/1.12903_Measuring-transgenic-vs-non-transgenic-siblings-CREDIT-AquaBounty.jpg_gen/derivatives/landscape_630/1.12903_Measuring-transgenic-vs-non-transgenic-siblings-CREDIT-AquaBounty.jpg

图5-2：http：//www.nature.com/polopoly_fs/7.35805.1460657043！/image/GettyImages-574543673_web.jpg_gen/derivatives/landscape_630/GettyImages-574543673_web.jpg

图5-3：http：//c.hiphotos.baidu.com/news/crop%3D0%2C1%2C500%2C300%3Bw%3D638/sign=a453f4ff072442a7ba41a7e5ec73817a/21a4462309f79052a220894204f3d7ca7bcbd58b.jpg

图5-4：改编自：http：//vector.childrenshospital.org/wp-content/uploads/2014/05/Illustration-1-Gene-Therapy-Final-Draft_small_WAS_gene_therapy.jpg

图5-5：改编自：http：//vector.childrenshospital.org/wp-content/uploads/2014/05/Illustration-1-Gene-Therapy-Final-Draft_small_WAS_gene_therapy.jpg

图5-6：改编自：http：//vector.childrenshospital.org/wp-content/uploads/2014/05/Illustration-1-Gene-Therapy-Final-Draft_small_WAS_gene_therapy.jpg

图5-7：https：//www.statnews.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/11/Image-2_credit-GOSH-2048x1152.jpg

图5-8：http：//images.lpcdn.ca/641x427/201305/18/691445-angelina-jolie.jpg

图5-9：https：//en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Andreas_Vesalius#/media/File：Vesalius_Portrait_pg_xii_-_c.png

图5-10：http：//clinicquotes.com/wp-content/uploads/2012/09/xparental-notifcation.jpg

[1]20世纪分子生物学的带头人之一，被称为“DNA之父”，1962年诺贝尔生理学或医学奖获得者。其著作《双螺旋》（插图注释本）中文简体字版已由湛庐文化策划，浙江人民出版社出版。——编者注

