Increasingly interconnected economies make it possible for a collapse of real estate prices in Las Vegas to affect financial markets in London and Hong Kong. An investment scandal at a French bank can cause prices of shares of other banks around the world to drop.

Even though financial networks involve a variety of organizations, and their relationships are different from the personal ones we have talked about to this point, they are networks built and occupied by humans, and are full of externalities. Thus, our discussion of contagion provides an excellent point of departure for understanding the spread of financial distress.

However, the reason that financial networks get their own discussion is that there is a countervailing effect that makes the workings of financial contagion subtler than the spread of a disease. Globalization leads not only to more interconnections, but also to more diversified investments and safer portfolios overall. 1 New contacts in a disease network help it spread faster and more widely, while in a financial network new contacts also help spread risk around so that it is better absorbed.

How do these opposing effects play out? Why is it that we still face world recessions and global financial contagions?

Many important financial markets remain remarkably under-diversified for a variety of reasons that we will explore in this chapter. This leads to a dangerous sweet spot for financial contagions in which the network is sufficiently connected to enable widespread contagion, but not so well diversified to prevent one institution’s failure from dragging others down with it.

A look at a particular global financial crisis is an illuminating starting point to understanding how a financial cascade can happen.

Anatomy of a Global Financial Crisis

Lehman Brothers, one of the world’s largest investment banks at the time, filed for bankruptcy on September 15, 2008. The drop in the U.S. stock markets that day, of more than 4 percent, was just a preview of what lay ahead. Lehman Brothers’ failure was largely due to what can now be seen as excessive exposure to subprime mortgages. They are subprime because the borrower’s credit history, and/or the value of the property on which the money is being borrowed, involve significant risks.

Sheila Ramos took out several such mortgages. She had moved to Florida after spending years in Alaska working jobs in beauty salons, a retail chain, and eventually building concrete enclosures for utility companies. Tired of working jobs she did not enjoy, she uprooted and moved south, buying a $300,000 house, free of any debt, using her own savings and money she received from the sale of her parents’ home. When she got restless for work and a source of income, she bought a local lawn-care service that she worked herself together with one of her sons. To pay for the business, Sheila took out a $90,000 mortgage on her home. All was fine until an automobile accident sidelined her and her business. Unable to make the payments on her mortgage, Sheila took out a new, larger mortgage for $140,000. She used that money to pay off her previous mortgage, additional rising debts due to her lost income, as well as medical and legal fees, hoping that the remainder would allow her to keep up with her new even larger mortgage payments until she was able to resume work. Unable to resume work, however, and hounded by collectors for her mounting debts, Sheila took out a third mortgage for $262,000 in December of 2006. This would allow her to pay off all of her previous debts, with another cushion that she hoped would tide her over on the new mortgage payments until she was able to work again. Each mortgage involved higher payments, and they were also adjustable and they grew over time.

The mortgages were thrust upon Sheila Ramos by a combination of unfortunate conditions, aggressive sales by the mortgage issuers, as well as decisions that she came to regret. The mortgages also made little sense from the perspective of the companies that were eventually left holding them. Sheila was later to find out that although she told the mortgage broker that she was unable to work and that her business was idle, her application was submitted listing her as employed with a $6,500 monthly income. It is not surprising that her mortgage saga ends sadly, with foreclosure and her moving into a tent with her grandchildren of whom she had custody. 2

One might take some solace in the eventual bankruptcy of Sheila’s mortgage broker’s company, but the catastrophe that such loans caused extended well beyond the people directly involved. Her story is extreme, but not atypical, as many people were attracted by the ease of refinancing and obtaining some quick cash against the value of their home. There were also many first-time buyers who found it surprisingly easy to buy a home — from people landing jobs in a then booming Las Vegas to those moving to growing suburbs in New Jersey. Borrowers of all types were aggressively pursued by issuers who were paid a fee for each mortgage, with little risk to themselves given the ease of reselling the mortgages.

The fact that many of the loans had been issued with very creative accounting on the applications was later seen by the courts to be a breach of contract, but even in the most notorious cases, such as that of Countrywide Financial (the largest issuer of mortgages), it was hard to prove outright fraud rather than carelessness and a failure to live up to the terms of a contract. They could not have done it alone. Most subprime mortgages issued in the U.S. passed through two large government-sponsored enterprises: Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, 3 which held some and repackaged and resold others with some guarantees. Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac would later be sued for their lack of oversight and the resale of securities that were not as advertised. The soaring market was also fueled by some of the lowest interest rates seen in decades and encouragement to grow the number of homeowners from sections of the U.S. government such as the Department of Housing and Urban Development. By 2008, Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac owned or guaranteed more than five trillion dollars’ worth of mortgages and mortgage-backed securities, nearly half of the enormous market.

The runaway mortgage train derailed in the summer of 2008, but its wheels had already been coming off the tracks for some time. Borrowers saw increases in their rates after the low introductory rates expired, and many like Sheila, who had been encouraged to take mortgages that were beyond their means, began to default. Home prices fell with the ensuing foreclosures, causing more people to be holding mortgages that exceeded the value of their homes. The increasingly obvious inevitable train wreck eventually sounded alarms. By early July 2008, the world was finally worrying about Fannie Mae’s and Freddie Mac’s enormous exposure to the market. It became all but impossible for them to sell mortgage-backed securities and to do their business as it became clearer that the guarantees Fannie and Freddie had made on many of the mortgages that they resold were essentially worthless, as were the many bonds that they had issued to finance their massive business. Given the trillions of dollars involved, the government had to step in to avoid a complete collapse of the market.

This brings us back to Lehman Brothers. As one of the largest underwriters of mortgage-backed securities, it had been immensely profitable during the run-up prior to 2007. But the dangers of the popping housing bubble became apparent when two of Bears Stearns’ hedge funds, also heavily invested in mortgages, failed. Wider-spread fear then led to a major drop in Lehman’s stock. Rather than face reality, Lehman doubled down, working more carefully on its accounting than its portfolio. Although it began unwinding some of its positions by the summer of 2008, it was too little too late.

Now we come to the network part of our story, where financial distress spreads beyond those directly involved in the mortgage markets. Given the government’s role in avoiding a catastrophe by helping Bears Stearns be absorbed by JPMorgan Chase earlier that year, it was rational to expect some support for Lehman Brothers. Unfortunately, even though Lehman Brothers was far「too connected to fail,」it was left to fail.

A few days after Lehman Brothers’ declaration of bankruptcy, AIG (American International Group) had to be bailed out. AIG was the major market maker in credit default swaps, insuring hundreds of billions of dollars of mortgages. 4 The bankruptcy of Lehman Brothers sent panic into that market and suddenly it was no longer clear whether AIG could back all of the low-price insurance it had issued presuming that it would never have to pay out on much of it.

The anticipated liquidation of Lehman Brothers’ large portfolio of mortgages then led to further panic in the mortgage markets, pushing more investment banks and investors over the brink. In addition, many hedge funds used Lehman Brothers as a broker and had tens of billions of dollars’ worth of their investments flowing through Lehman, which had used those assets as collateral and other means of leveraging its own investments. It also turned out that some prominent money market funds, which are thought of as some of the safest short-term investments, were overly exposed to Lehman Brothers. For example, Reserve Primary Fund held more than three quarters of a billion dollars in Lehman Brothers debt. They「broke the buck」 — meaning that people who had invested in their money market fund were paid back less than they invested — a worse investment than just sitting on cash.

This spread outward as a loss of faith in money market funds hit companies who depended on those funds for short-term borrowing — companies with no connections to mortgage markets or the firms involved in those markets. Similarly, the interbank lending market — an essential tool that banks use for short-term balancing of their portfolios and deposits — completely dried up, as nobody was any longer sure which banks were solvent and which ones would soon be zombies. For some time thereafter, the Federal Reserve had to step in to fill the hole left in the interbank market.

Within a year and a half, the Dow Jones Industrial Average lost more than half its value: from a high of more than 14,000 in October of 2007, it fell below 7,000 by March of 2009. The London-based FTSE 100 would lose more than 40 percent of its value over the same period as banks in the U.K. and Ireland failed. The major stock markets around the world saw similar drops, for instance with the major indices in Hong Kong, Shanghai, Tokyo, Mumbai, and Frankfurt all losing more than half of their value between late 2007 and early 2009. Iceland’s financial problems became so dire that its government became insolvent.

Many have argued about whether saving Lehman Brothers would have made a small or large difference in the subsequent crisis. The market was very interconnected and many financial institutions were overly exposed, directly or indirectly, to the disaster in the subprime market. Although some of the ramifications of Lehman’s failure may have happened eventually in any case, the panic it caused in many markets led the impact to be much wider than the financial markets in which it originated. From a network perspective, stopping contagions at earlier points is always easier and cheaper than letting them play out and then trying to clean things up afterward.

There are three main reasons that the U.S. government, in the form of the U.S. Treasury and the Federal Reserve, did not intervene.

First, some officials at the U.S. Treasury wanted to send a message that large private companies could not all expect bailouts. The Treasury had already been involved in bailouts of Bear Stearns, Fannie Mae, and Freddie Mac, and many people, including congressmen, expressed a view that enough was enough. However, as Darrell Duffie (a professor of finance at Stanford University, and a leading expert on financial markets, who also happens to have been my dissertation advisor) said,「When the house is burning down and the fire crew is there and the firefighters are hosing down the house putting the fire out, it’s not the time to turn off the hose and give the homeowners a lecture about smoking in bed.」

Second, critical people did not have the information they needed to predict the consequences of letting Lehman fail. The minutes from the Federal Reserve Board meetings at the time reveal little awareness of what would ensue. A detailed network picture of the financial system was not available then, and is remarkably opaque even today. If various arms of government (including Congress) had had a clearer network picture of the exposures at the time, they would have — or at least should have — acted very differently.

Third, there were also questions about how the Federal Reserve could have best intervened under the legal restrictions on its activities. This was uncharted territory and it was not clear what the Fed was really entitled to do.

The consequences of not intervening appeared quickly and were eventually widespread and catastrophic. Letting Lehman Brothers fail, in hindsight, was a huge blunder and ended up costing much more in the subsequent bailouts. Eventually the trillions of dollars spent by governments around the world did manage to stop the contagion from truly playing out like a plague, but it did not save the world from long and painful recessions. Even so, we were lucky not to see the full cascade of failures that could have ensued. What if the U.S. Treasury had not intervened on behalf of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, and if there had not been a bailout of AIG, and if various governments around the world had not propped up their banks and a variety of businesses?

Clearly lessons had been learned from the Great Depression, when it took years for the government to take the right actions after large-scale bankruptcies of the many banks and others who had been overextended in a soaring stock market (instead of a soaring subprime mortgage market). The ensuing sell-offs, panic, and freezing of capital markets caused huge contractions in investment, business, and ultimately wages and consumer spending, sending the world economy into a deep spiral. Even then the network effects were apparent. Just as one example, the crash of Wall Street cut short the large lending to Germany that was enabling it to make its payment of World War I reparations. As Germany halted its payments, panic ensued and investors stopped lending there, leading to widespread business collapse and a record-breaking depression, furthering the political and economic chaos during which the Nazi party gained a solid toehold. Of course it is impossible to know whether World War II would have been avoided had the spread of the Great Depression been cut at an early stage, but the financial contagion of the Great Depression is unmistakable.

A strong contrast between the international trade network of then and now is that the network was much more fragmented at the time of the Great Depression. For instance, China, Japan, and the Soviet Union had limited business with the West in the 1930s, and their banking systems were almost entirely insulated, and thus they saw almost no effects from the complete economic meltdown that was hitting parts of the Americas and Europe. In fact, it was a period of large growth in industry for the Soviet Union.

What Is Special About Financial Contagions?

「So, first of all, let me assert my firm belief that the only thing we have to fear is fear itself — nameless, unreasoning, unjustified terror which paralyzes needed efforts to convert retreat into advance.」

 —  FRANKLIN D. ROOSEVELT, FIRST INAUGURAL ADDRESS, MARCH 4, 1933

Our basic network analysis provides insights into economic contagion. Centrality in a financial network can help identify who is too connected to fail and it is becoming a primary tool in assessing risk. The connectedness of the network serves as a first assessment of the risk of potential contagions in the global network.

However, there are fascinating twists.

First is that financial markets involve a multitude of different players and types of interactions. Whereas a flu makes its way from one person to another by the spread of a virus, a financial insolvency can make its way from borrowers to banks to insurers, to the many others who do business with them, to markets, and then to employees and shareholders throughout an economy. The connections in the network involve all sorts of transactions and contracts — from loans to partnerships to insurance contracts to elaborate securities to the simple sales of goods and assets — with the key being that something of value is owed from one party to another, and so the wealth of one party depends on the other’s. This enormous scope of the network makes it hard for investors and governments to truly assess the rare but potentially catastrophic risk that underlies financial contagions.

A second twist is that having more connections does not always translate into a greater danger of「infection」in financial networks. Having many counterparties can be safer than contracting with just one. This is one of the most basic principles of investing: diversifying a portfolio lowers risk. If exposure is spread among enough counterparties, then a default by any one of them becomes inconsequential. This makes financial contagion fundamentally different from other forms of contagion. Having sex with many partners increases one’s risk for catching sexually transmitted diseases greatly compared to having sex many times with the same partner. In contrast, by spreading business across more relationships, companies can become less exposed to the shocks that might hit any particular region, market, or supplier.

This leads to an interesting trade-off in economic networks. 5 Initially, as companies connect to each other via trades, securities, and various contracts and obligations, the threat of financial contagion increases because the enterprises become interdependent — a network takes shape and we grow above a basic reproduction number of one. For instance, if each organization has two or three major counterparties, then the network can be quite connected in terms of having a giant component. Moreover, with just a few major counterparties each organization is at substantial risk if one of its partners defaults on an obligation or is unable to deliver on a promise. However, as we continue to add connections, the level of systemic risk eventually falls as each given institution becomes more diversified in its exposure and less prone to fail as a consequence of any one of its neighbors failing. Even though the network is becoming more densely connected, the chance for cascades along any of those connections is dropping.

The worst case for financial contagion is the middle ground. There are enough connections to generate a connected network in which companies are all indirectly connected to one another. However, there are still few enough connections so that most companies do a large amount of their business with just a few others and could be dragged down by the insolvency of a business partner.

This trade-off is illustrated in Figure 4.1. For instance, think of each node as a bank that has some investments on its own, and the links as representing investments and contracts with other banks. Those relationships might involve the purchase of a share of the investments of the other bank (e.g., mortgages) or bonds issued by the other bank, or short-term loans, et cetera, all of which are claims on the assets and investments of the counterparties. The thickness of the relationships indicates the fraction of the banks’ investments that are with each other bank. I am abstracting from all sorts of details and just illustrating the basic structural dependencies.

Figure 4.1: Four financial networks that differ in the likelihood of a financial contagion. The thickness of the links indicates the level of interdependency between two banks.

As we see in panel (a), a very disconnected network is relatively safe from having widespread contagion. But this comes at a large day-to-day cost: there is not much trading between the different financial institutions. The lack of interaction means that the banks are not sharing the idiosyncratic risks that they face, and so their returns are unnecessarily noisy and risky. 6

As we move to panel (b), the network becomes connected. This is a particularly dangerous case as it has moved to a situation in which there is a path of potential contagion from every institution to every other one, and each bank has substantial exposure to its counterparties and is still not well-diversified.

Risks improve when we move to panel (c), as now even though the network is more densely connected, the banks have spread their interactions around and so lowered their level of exposure to any particular counterparty. If one bank becomes insolvent there is less of a chance that it will infect and drag down a counterparty. Here, we see the first real difference between financial contagions and diseases, as things become relatively safer moving from (b) to (c) in a financial setting, while it would be the reverse in the case of a disease. 7

Finally, when we move to (d) things have gotten worse again, since we have increased the exposure of four of the banks to each other. If one of them were to become insolvent then the core of the four major banks would be in peril, and the cumulative exposure of the others to that core becomes a problem.

One would hope that we would be far from the dangerous sweet spots in (b) and (d); however, as we have seen from the subprime mortgage crisis, there are major players in markets that become impossible to avoid. Economies of scope and scale have led leading financial firms to become enormous, to such an extent that it is impossible for most other firms not to have extensive transactions with the largest players.

A third twist with financial markets is that「infection」can occur even without any contact: a bank might become insolvent even without having any of its investments fail. Fear and uncertainty can be as damaging to financial markets as the cascading failures due to some bad investments. If we all woke up tomorrow and believed that Bank X would be insolvent, then it would become insolvent. In fact, it would be enough for us to fear that others believed that Bank X was going to fail, or just to fear our collective fear! We might all even know that Bank X was well-managed with healthy investments, but if we expected others to pull their money out, then we would fear being the last to pull our money out. Financial distress can be self-fulfilling and is a particularly troublesome aspect of financial markets. Such fears underlay some bank runs. 8

This distinguishes financial markets from other markets. If you are about to buy some apples from your local grocer and fear that the grocer might go bankrupt, it does not affect your decision to buy those apples. You might have to go elsewhere for your apples in the future, but that fear would not discourage you from your purchase. If you are about to deposit money in a bank and fear that the bank’s business may soon be disrupted, it makes a huge difference. Perhaps you just hear a rumor — you don’t have to believe the rumor or even believe that others will believe the rumor — all you have to believe is that the rumor may cause others to withdraw their money from the bank. Once people lose confidence in the financial system in general, savings and investments really are at risk. The hoarding of cash during the Great Depression was a serious problem.

This is an ageless aspect of finance, and of investments more generally, as we see in Roosevelt’s quote from the Great Depression. The loss of more than 50 percent in world stock markets between late 2007 and early 2009, and then the subsequent rebound a few years later, cannot be rationalized as a huge loss in the actual values of the companies and then a miraculous rebound; instead it was uncertainty about which companies might end up insolvent and how wide and deep the recession would be and the fear that accompanied that uncertainty. The fact that markets eventually regained their footing does not mean that all ended well. There was a substantial loss of employment, production, and consumption during the downturn, and the disruption of basic investments and economic activity lasted for some years. Uncertainty in and of itself is costly and debilitating. 9

This third twist was on John Maynard Keynes’s mind when he discussed what has become known as the Keynesian Beauty Contest in his General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money . He described a contest from a newspaper in which people try to pick the six「prettiest」faces out of a set of a hundred pictures. The twist was similar to that in our discussion above.「Prettiest」was defined to be the faces picked by the most people. As Keynes states (page 156),「It is not a case of choosing those which, to the best of one’s judgment, are really the prettiest, nor even those which average opinion genuinely thinks the prettiest. We have reached the third degree where we devote our intelligences to anticipating what average opinion expects the average opinion to be. And there are some, I believe, who practise the fourth, fifth and higher degrees.」

This twist means that some aspects of investing are uncoupled from the values of the underlying assets, allowing bubbles in share prices to exist as well as fear-induced runs. At times, investing is as much about predicting what others will be willing to pay, and for how long, as it is about understanding the true value of an investment. 10 Networks and perceptions enter again — since prominent individuals can have a disproportionate impact on the value of a stock — by expressing an opinion or starting a rumor, especially if we expect others to be paying attention to the same individual. 11

Free Markets and Externalities

「The very nature of finance is that it cannot be profitable unless it is significantly leveraged…and as long as there is debt, there can be failure and contagion.」

 —  ALAN GREENSPAN

Adam Smith was rightly impressed by the workings of markets when he coined the term「the invisible hand.」There are many markets that work well when completely free and open, unfettered by intervention. Many goods and services that people consume, from bread to haircuts, involve at most minimal externalities so that the individual costs and benefits to producing and consuming such goods reflect the societal costs and benefits. Also, economies of scale in many markets are small enough so that many firms can compete, with none becoming so large as to have a substantial impact. Unfortunately, neither of these is true of financial markets: they involve substantial externalities and economies of scale.

The externalities in financial markets come in the form of the network of potential consequences from one firm’s mistakes. One firm’s insolvency and default on payments can lead its counterparties to become insolvent, causing cascades of failures and associated costs of bankruptcy. Those costs are large. In a review of bankruptcy costs, 12 Ben Branch, an economist at the University of Massachusetts-Amherst, estimates that claimants on a firm typically get 56 percent of the (book) value of the bankrupt firm before it became insolvent. 13 Typical recovery rates on bonds are in the 40 to 50 percent range, and even if the debt is secured or has priority in bankruptcy that still might only be 70 percent. The people who are owed money by the bankrupt firm are losing a large fraction of their investment, and losses of this magnitude can lead them to become distressed too.

These externalities mean that incentives are not aligned: Lehman Brothers not only continued to underestimate the risks of a heavy exposure to subprime mortgages even as late as early 2008, but they were also mainly worried about their own profits, not the catastrophe that they would cause if they were to go bankrupt. Certainly nobody tries to go bankrupt, but the full risk to society of a firm’s investments can be many times larger than the direct risk to the firm, especially given the enormous leverage that is common in such markets. Many investments are made with borrowed money, or a variety of other arrangements, which only exacerbates the problem.

To illustrate the point, if you are employed by a company that is having cash problems and starts delaying your paychecks, and eventually stops making those payments, then you may start missing mortgage and/or car loan payments. If that leads to your being called into default on those payments, it leads to serious costs to you. The same is true when one company becomes insolvent and another company to whom it owes money ends up getting only a fraction of what it is owed, often with substantial delay. That next company can then have difficulties paying what it owes, which is compounded by further legal costs and losses, and can lead it to delaying or stopping payments, and this then cascades, with more costs accumulating at each step.

This would not be too big of a problem if the networks were well-diversified and each firm had many counterparties, none having too large an exposure. In that case, any single firm’s insolvency becomes a small blip that is easily absorbed by its many partners with little lasting impact. However, this is where the economies of scale cause problems.

In financial markets there are substantial advantages to being huge, and so there are key firms that are both too big to fail and too connected to fail. For instance, the size of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac made them hard to avoid in the subprime mortgage market: many large firms were owed huge amounts of money by Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac. Fannie’s and Freddie’s failures would not have been easily absorbed blips: the government had no choice but to step in when they became insolvent — eventually taking them over and swallowing enormous losses. Had it instead let that snowball keep running downhill, it would have grown in size and could have cost even more trillions of dollars in costs to the economy before it came to rest.

As evidence of「bigger is better」pressures in financial markets, the number of banks continues to drop, and the size of the largest banks continues to grow. In 1980 there were over 14,000 commercial banks recognized by the FDIC (Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation) in the U.S., yet by 2016 that number was just over 5,000. This consolidation was not due to a contracting industry: the amount of FDIC-reported assets of these institutions went up by a factor of more than eight, moving from under $2 trillion in 1980 to over $15 trillion by 2014. 14

The consolidation of financial services into enormous banks is not just happening within a narrow part of the industry, but also cutting throughout the industry as a whole. The Glass-Steagall Act of 1933 had separated investment banking (underwriting the issuance of securities, market making in various securities, and handling mergers and acquisitions, among other activities), commercial banking (taking deposits and issuing loans), and insurance (issuing insurance policies). The Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act (the Financial Services Modernization Act) of 1999 undid that. John Dingell (a congressman from Michigan), in a prescient debate, predicted that it would lead to bank holding companies becoming too big to fail. Individuals could now hold savings and investment accounts at the same institutions. It can be convenient to have one-stop financial shopping. However, the resulting behemoth financial institutions are far from ideal for reasons well beyond their too big to fail sizes, as they can be betting against the trades of their depositors and have basic conflicts of interest when advising and managing money. 15

Most important, the capital is not spread evenly among banks; much of it is concentrated at the very top. The ten largest banks in the world — the top four of which are in China — had assets of almost $26 trillion in 2016. To put that in perspective, the GDP (a measure of the total value of production) of China and the U.S. combined was just over $29 trillion in 2016 and the world total GDP was just over $75 trillion. In 1990 the five largest banks in the U.S. accounted for roughly 10 percent of the total assets in domestic banking industry but by 2015 they accounted for almost 45 percent . Total assets actually went up substantially after the subprime mortgage crisis, as the five largest banks controlled just above 35 percent of industry assets in 2007. It is almost impossible for many companies to avoid having substantial dealings with one of the largest banks in the world.

Figure 4.2 gives an impression of what the network of the largest of the U.S. banks looked like even before this further consolidation. It shows the sixty-six largest banks in what is known as the Fedwire system, which is a way in which banks and other related financial institutions transfer funds from one to another. This is at a very aggregated level, so it abstracts from the details of what is actually being transacted between the banks. Nonetheless, it gives us a high-level impression of who is doing how much business with whom, and thus who might experience serious disruptions in its business if one of its counterparties were to become insolvent.

We see several telling patterns. The three or four largest players have enormous size and large volumes of interactions with each other. Also, the twenty-five main banks form a tightly clustered core, and then each of the peripheral banks (often regional banks) feed into one or two of these core players. This quite distinctive pattern is called a「core-periphery network,」and is the shape of many financial networks. 16 It becomes easy to see why we should worry about the failure of one of the largest core banks, as it could affect the other large banks and the core, and ultimately the periphery. This is not so unlike panel (d) from Figure 4.1!

Figure 4.2: The sixty-six largest banks in the Fedwire system (accounting for three fourths of the total volume). The data are from 2004, before the subprime mortgage crisis and when concentration in the banking industry was much lower than today. The twenty-five most active banks form a densely connected cluster. The link width corresponds to the amount of transactions between two banks. Reprinted from Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and Its Applications , Vol. 379, Kimmo Soramäki, Morten Bech, Jeffrey Arnold, Robert Glass, and Walter Beyeler, 317–333. Copyright (2007), with permission from Elsevier.

What underlies the enormous size of the largest banks and their continued growth? There are many features that lead bigger to be better in financial markets. On a very basic level, one can save on fixed costs of information and communication technologies. There are many costs associated with building and maintaining databases and accounting systems that do not depend on how many entries they hold. By merging, two banks have to pay those costs only once instead of twice. On the investments and business side, having more money to invest allows one to build more diversified portfolios and also opens up opportunities to invest in large projects that are beyond the reach of small investors. It also permits one to diversify over broader geographic regions and branches of business. Having a presence in many parts of the world and offering more services makes a bank more attractive to a multinational company. Also, expanding business to taking deposits and trading various securities allows a financial institution to take advantage of synergies in trading and market making — especially in terms of information. On top of all of this, comes branding and reputation: becoming too big to fail makes the large bank a more attractive counterparty, as it is implicitly insured in ways that smaller banks are not.

Although building these larger and better-diversified behemoths allows them to easily absorb any small or regional downturns, it comes at the cost of the enormous disasters resulting from their inevitable mistakes, such as having far too much exposure to a subprime lending market. 17 The externalities are large, as the firms don’t consider the market-wide consequences of their investments and potential failures.

In addition to these externalities, coupled with size of the main players, there are pressures that push companies to do business with just a few counterparties. The costs of contracting and doing business can make it much more attractive to contract with one or two counterparties rather than spreading business widely. This is easy to see in our own lives: maintaining multiple bank accounts becomes costly and time-consuming. We don’t worry too much since our governments implicitly or explicitly insure many accounts — and the same is true for many businesses. We see that quite clearly by looking at the peripheral banks in Figure 4.2: they do most of their transactions with one, two, or three other banks. Not only is it costly to maintain many contacts, but also doing more business with just one counterparty leads to larger accounts, which may get better treatment and attention. Preferred customers exist at all levels of business. The larger interdependence can help two parties work out a contract when unforeseen issues arise. 18 Larger interdependencies also lead to preferential treatment in turbulent times, and the repeated interaction with a partner can help build trust that is reinforced by the value of the future relationship. A company is less tempted to gouge a partner with whom it expects a long and fruitful future business stream.

There is more than one aspect of a large core bank’s decisions that can hurt others. One is that it chooses overly risky investments and becomes insolvent. The second is that it does too much of its business with a few partners and thus leaves itself (and the rest of the network indirectly) exposed to one of its large partners going bankrupt. These are worth distinguishing: the first externality is that a bank might put itself at more direct risk of bankruptcy and starting a contagion than the rest of the network would like, while the second externality is that it positions itself in the network in a way that makes it more likely to become infected by others and then to perpetuate a contagion.

Financial networks are also now very international. Figure 4.3 shows us the debt obligations from one country held by banks within another country, which comes from research I did together with economists Matt Elliott and Ben Golub, two of my former students. It focuses on just a few of the key European countries in the Greek debt crisis. As an example, almost $330 billion worth of Italian debt was held by French banks at the end of 2011. This is reflected in the large arrow from Italy to France. 19 French banks then had substantial exposure to a drop in the valuation of Italian debt, which, for instance, can be influenced by the health of Italian banks. The Italian banks hold a lot of German debt, and German banks hold a lot of Greek debt, and so forth.

Even though Greece is a relatively small country, the exposures in question were large enough to be a big problem. A few percentage points change in returns can move a financial institution from being profitable to not, and these holdings are often heavily concentrated. There was good reason for the troika of the IMF, the European Central Bank, and a fund from European countries to bail out Greece via emergency loans and by buying hundreds of billions of euros’ worth of Greek bonds to keep their value from collapsing and taking many banks with them.

Figure 4.3: The arrows show how much sovereign debt (government-issued bonds) of each country is held in each other country based on data from the end of 2011. The widths of the arrows indicate the size of the exposure (excluding dependencies of less than 5 percent). For instance, 13 percent of Greek debt at the end of 2011 was held by French banks. Figure and data from Elliott, Golub, and Jackson (2014).

To summarize, a variety of forces push financial networks to the sweet spot that enables contagion:

Economies of scale and scope give bigger banks many advantages over smaller ones and so a substantial fraction of business is concentrated among the largest banks.

Banks and other financial institutions have reasons to trade with each other, leading to a connected network.

Having larger dealings with a few counterparties, rather than spreading that business widely, saves relationship costs and can lead to preferred treatment. Thus, there are critical connections in financial markets that involve substantial exposure of one company to another.

The substantial costs of bankruptcies can cause one company’s insolvency to drag others down with it.

Externalities on counterparties and potential cascades are not taken into account by companies when choosing their portfolios and partnerships.

Uncertainty and fear cause investors to pull money and stop lending, which can quickly push both distressed and otherwise healthy financial institutions into insolvency.

These forces — especially in combination — mean that financial markets require oversight and care.

Regulation

「But the position is serious when enterprise becomes the bubble on a whirlpool of speculation. When the capital development of a country becomes a by-product of the activities of a casino, the job is likely to be ill-done.」

 —  JOHN MAYNARD KEYNES, THE GENERAL THEORY OF EMPLOYMENT, INTEREST AND MONEY

How should we regulate financial markets? The divergence of views on this question is enormous. Some people simply argue that financial markets work well completely on their own. Such people are either ignorant of the size issues, externalities, and network problems present, or simply choose to ignore the implications because they have a stake in the game. They either stopped learning about economics after the first lesson on markets and never learned about externalities; or they stand to profit from their position in the network. Others echo a range of economists, from Alfred Marshall, to Ludwig von Mises, to Milton Friedman, who — either from a distrust of governments, a strong philosophical belief in the individual, or a faith that competitive forces can overcome anything in the long run — conclude that we are better off minimizing government intervention or avoiding it altogether.

Governments have shortcomings, some much worse than others. Nonetheless, the largest enterprises are so huge that governments have repeatedly been forced to step in and bail them out throughout the world’s financial history, and so government intervention is inevitable. It is then better to have even minimal oversight that avoids disasters before they happen rather than paying to clean them up afterward. Making sure that such large enterprises are not overly exposed to any particular investment or counterparty is an obvious start — part of the thinking behind stress tests. Such oversight is not easy, as the tendency of firms to be secretive about their investments and trading strategies, coupled with the increasing complexity of securities and derivatives, makes it a challenge to get a detailed view of exposures.

Moreover, this is now a global challenge: a default by a U.S. investment bank is not a regional issue, nor is a default on Greek bonds, nor a drop in the Thai currency, 20 nor a change in Chinese housing prices. Tracking the global financial network in fine detail is impossible at present, and so one is left with partial pictures. 21 Making progress will require more careful and unified accounting standards, communication between various governments and agencies, and methods of flagging and defusing dangerous exposures when they emerge instead of waiting until they become obvious because of impending catastrophe. And all of this has to be done while balancing the costs it imposes, both on government and the market participants. It is a bit like brain surgery: it is delicate and we still don’t have a fully comprehensive understanding and map of the complex system we are dealing with, but there are clear situations in which it is needed.

It is worth adding that there are many ways in which incentives are misaligned in such complex markets. As we saw with subprime lending, the fact that mortgages were being resold — and not closely inspected by the rating agencies, insurers, and others who should have been doing due diligence — meant that those issuing them profited by issuing mortgages as fast as they could with little attention to whether the mortgage was right for the borrower or would eventually be repaid. This is just one example of what is known as playing with 「other people’s money」 — the person making decisions on the investments is not at risk for the full amount of the investments. Most financial investments are heavily leveraged: much of the money involved is borrowed or from other partners who are not directly involved in the day-to-day choices being made. Traders for large investment banks, mutual funds, hedge funds, and others are rewarded if risks pay off, but face limited losses if the investments go bust. This distorts their decisions, and can lead them to take on too much risk. 22 The implicit bailouts that wait in the wings for「too big to fail」enterprises, mean that they are playing with other people’s money — the taxpayers’ in addition to any other counterparties whose money they are managing or have borrowed. This exacerbates the misalignment of their interests due to the externalities of broader cascades that exist due to the network structure and costs of bankruptcy.

Governments are thus faced with economies that are based on an enormous and complex web of interdependencies and exposures that is constantly evolving and hard to monitor. Governments are also faced with behemoth enterprises that they explicitly and implicitly insure, who exude externalities, and who have incentives that are not aligned with a country’s long-run prosperity. These challenges are compounded by the fact that there are significant economies of scale and scope, and one does not want to simply give up on the substantial cost savings that are associated with large businesses that take advantage of synergies across geographic and business domains.

Regulating markets in terms of which institutions can make which sorts of investments faces its own difficulties. Even when one regulates one market, investors move their money to other institutions that are not covered by the regulation. For example, after the Great Depression banks were prohibited from providing interest on checking accounts. Accounts by savings and loans and investment banks, however, were not regulated and could pay interest. Thus, savings and loans and other financial institutions began to offer checking accounts and easy movement of funds together with interest payments. Not surprisingly, people started moving their money to interest-paying accounts, driving the growth of savings and loans and money market accounts that lay outside the regulations. 23 The competition to attract customers led savings and loans to make shaky investments in order to be able to pay the increasing interest rates that they were promising their customers. This eventually led to more than one thousand savings and loans (out of just over three thousand in the U.S.) to go bankrupt between the late 1980s and 1990s. In addition to the financial stress it caused, this drove people to move their money out of savings and loans and helped fuel the growth of investment banks and a variety of other funds and enterprises. Many of these players were eventually caught up in the subprime crisis by 2008.

Thus, financial regulation has to deal with moving targets that continuously adjust and evolve to circumvent restrictions. 24 This is something that few governments are currently equipped to do. Developing better systems for comprehending the network of contracts and exposures is an important starting point.

Popcorn or Dominoes?

There is a key distinction regarding which crises are really networked: is a financial crisis a case of「popcorn or dominoes」? This is a metaphor of Eddie Lazear (a coauthor and friend), who was the chairman of the Council of Economic Advisors from 2006 to 2009 at the time of the subprime crisis.

Network contagion is a dominoes story: one default causes problems for others, like rows of dominoes knocking each other over. Another feature of some financial crises is like popcorn popping. Popcorn kernels that are all bubbling in the same hot oil eventually come to explode around the same time for the same reason; and one might mistakenly believe that they are causing each other to pop.

The subprime crisis involved both popcorn and dominoes. The hot oil that many companies were boiling in was clearly the deteriorating housing market and defaults on mortgages. 25 Even though it can be difficult to pinpoint which companies would definitely have gone bankrupt completely on their own, it is not hard to see that government takeovers and bailouts, especially of Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac, and AIG, were essential — a default on the trillions of dollars of contracts that they had with other firms in the U.S. and around the world would have been catastrophic. 26 Moreover, there were many large banks and other companies that were the first row of dominoes, which were not directly at risk due to failing mortgages but were indirectly exposed via their large interactions with the companies that were popping.

The「Financial Crisis Inquiry Report」27 (commissioned by an act of Congress) makes it clear how the impending dominoes spurred the government’s intervention in the propping up of AIG, the takeover of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, and the bailouts and subsidized sales of various institutions. For example, they quote an email (page 346) in September of 2008 from Hayley Boesky of the New York Fed to William Dudley, who was head of the capital markets group at the New York Fed:「More panic from [hedge funds]. Now focus is on AIG. I am hearing worse than LEH [Lehman Brothers]. Every bank and dealer has exposure to them.」As the report states (page 347),「AIG’s bankruptcy would also affect other companies because of its ‘non-trivial exotic derivatives book,’ a $2.7 trillion over-the-counter derivatives portfolio of which $1 trillion was concentrated in 12 large counterparties.」This is consistent with the who’s who list of banks that would eventually get government payments of billions of dollars to cover payments they should have gotten from AIG. 28 The report concludes (page 352):「Without the bailout, AIG’s default and collapse could have brought down its counterparties, causing cascading losses and collapses throughout the financial system.」29 The reference to dominoes could not be clearer.

Takeaways: Flying Jets Without Instruments

With increasing globalization, financial networks are becoming more connected and the most central players are growing larger than ever. Although the connectedness of the networks and size of many of the most central players helps the system easily absorb normal and even some large losses, the potential for worldwide recessions caused by unexpectedly large shocks to key nodes has grown.

Although our network perspective is vital, it does not settle a debate on how to best manage the many trade-offs associated with economies of scope and scale, the increasingly intertwined global markets, and the many externalities and distorted behaviors involved. Striking the right balance between free markets and regulation is a challenge.

Nonetheless, a network perspective makes clear that there are enormous externalities, and that in order to assess systemic risk, we must have a more complete picture of the financial network of exposures: real dangers are completely missed by looking at financial institutions one at a time. Diffusion centrality-like calculations for financial markets are feasible with the right information. Central banks, and other national and international government branches and agencies, not to mention financial institutions themselves, are essentially flying jets without instruments. They are making rapid decisions that steer complex machinery based on limited information. Having more extensive and detailed maps of financial networks would begin to provide the actors, both private and public, with some of the instruments they need to avoid future crises.

More generally, our look at financial networks reemphasizes several points. Networks enable one individual’s or institution’s actions to affect many others. Such externalities are important in understanding why people’s incentives to vaccinate are too weak, and their incentives to take on risky investments are too strong. In addition, there are externalities in the partnerships that people form — having a sexual partner who is not monogamous or a financial partner that has substantial exposure to a risky counterparty are both costly. Finally, people react to what happens in their networks, from changing their travel patterns to turtling up and pulling their money out of markets, with potentially drastic consequences.

5 • HOMOPHILY: HOUSES DIVIDED

The Caste System

「Segregation is that which is forced upon an inferior by a superior. Separation is done voluntarily by two equals.」

 —  MALCOLM X

