IMMOBILITY

Claire Vaye Watkins grew up in Pahrump, Nevada. Pahrump means「water rock」and it sits midway between Las Vegas and Badwater (Death Valley). As goes with the region, the climate can be brutal and the average temperature is over 100 degrees in the middle of the summer. Pahrump is remote but has valuable water sources — springing from artesian wells. 1 It was home to the Southern Paiute before being settled by pioneers in the 1800s. Its cotton and alfalfa production have given way to other sources of income, and today it boasts several casinos, (legal) brothels, a golf course, and a speedway. The median income in Pahrump lies well below the U.S. median, but places it solidly in what one might call the lower middle class.

You might expect that the very highest-achieving students from a lower-middle-class community would have a chance at ending up in a top college. However, as Watkins described in an essay called「The Ivy League Was Another Planet,」you would be completely mistaken. 2 She describes a trip to Lake Tahoe when she was in twelfth grade. She, and a friend from Pahrump named Ryan, had been selected as finalists for a competition to choose the「Top 100」seniors in the state of Nevada. As she describes it:

On the plane, Ryan and I met a boy from Las Vegas. Looking to size up the competition, we asked what high school he went to. He said a name we didn’t recognize and added,「It’s a magnet school.」Ryan asked what a magnet school was, and spent the remaining hour incredulously demanding a detailed account of the young man’s educational history: his time abroad, his after-school robotics club, his tutors, his college prep courses.

All educations, we realized then, are not created equal. For Ryan and me, of Pahrump, Nev., just an hour from the city, the Vegas boy was a citizen of a planet we would never visit. What we didn’t know was that there were other, more distant planets that we could not even see. And those planets couldn’t see us, either.

Even though she lived only an hour from a major metropolitan area, Claire knew precious little about colleges and how to get into them. Her sense of isolation and local lack of knowledge help explain why immobility and inequality are not temporary phenomena. Claire’s story begins to answer the question of why more people don’t educate themselves in spite of the increasing wage polarization between the educated and the uneducated.

Immobility results when people end up trapped by the social circumstances into which they are born: the networks in which they are embedded fail to provide them with the information and opportunities that they need to succeed.

Beyond moral objections, immobility is problematic because it is inefficient: it lowers productivity as some of a society’s most productive individuals end up locked in unproductive roles. How many Picassos have spent their lives working in coal mines? What if the person who would have otherwise found a cure for a cancer was just born in a slum? As such, immobility can have a substantial impact on a country’s growth rate.

Homophily plays the key role in our story of immobility. Homophily shapes the information that parents have, and the ways in which they raise their children. Even controlling for parents, the community in which a child exists goes a long way toward explaining that child’s educational and lifetime earnings opportunities. It affects what they expect from society and what a society expects of them. Alona King, a young black woman who majored in computer science at Stanford, captures the point:「I hate walking around the halls of the Gates Computer Science Building….I always get hit with the four words every non-tech minority thinks whenever they see an unfamiliar minority in a tech space: ‘Hey, are you lost?’ 」3

In order to develop an understanding of the full role of networks in immobility and inequality, we will begin with some background on inequality and immobility, and their tight interrelationship. We will also discuss the changing labor market — the growing distance between wages of people with and without a college degree. The final piece of background is immobility in education — children born to uneducated parents and networks tend to end up with lower levels of cognitive interaction and education from birth, and much lower chances of any higher education.

Once we have this background in place, networks will then enter the story in several ways. First, as we see in Claire’s story above, homophily limits information flows and basic knowledge not only of the value of education, but how to go about getting it. This is true of both parents choosing how to raise their children and what the children learn from those around them. Second, incentives to get an education and to enter the formal labor force are heavily dependent upon the behavior of one’s peers and community. Third, wages and opportunities once one is in the labor force are heavily dependent upon how many of one’s peers are employed since networks of contacts are the primary source of getting a job. These network effects when combined, especially given that they feed off of each other, help us to understand persistent and increasing immobility and inequality. These forces can be more powerful than wealth effects from parents to children, which explain only a fraction of recent trends.

Immobility, Inequality, and the「Great Gatsby Curve」

「So we beat on, boats against the current, borne back ceaselessly into the past.」

 —  F. SCOTT FITZGERALD, THE GREAT GATSBY

It is clear that a child’s success and happiness later in life depend upon the start afforded to her by her parents and community. Standard ways of measuring the stickiness of status across generations is to compare children and their parents according to factors such as income, wealth, and college achievement. How strongly correlated are the fates of children with their parents’? Figure 6.1 shows how a child’s eventual income relates to that of her parents. The specific measure pictured here is what is called「intergenerational earnings elasticity.」

Figure 6.1: Immobility: Intergenerational earnings elasticity. This is a normalized measure of the correlation between child and parent earnings, with 0 meaning that child and parental earnings are essentially uncoupled, and 1 indicating that a parent’s relative standing in earnings is fully reflected in the child’s relative standing. Data from Miles Corak (2016).

Intergenerational earnings elasticity can be thought of as answering the following question. Suppose that your family earns 10 percent more per year than my family. How much more do you end up earning than I when we grow up? If the answer is 10 percent, then the entire advantage that your family had over mine is preserved across generations. Since the ratio of how much more you earn than I compared to how much more your family earned than mine is 1, there is complete immobility: we end up with the same relative rankings as our parents. If instead you earned just one percent more than I do, then only one tenth of your family’s advantage over mine would have been passed along. If we have the same incomes, then there is complete mobility as our relative standings are independent of our parents’ relative standings, which corresponds to an elasticity of zero. Thus, the elasticity is a measure of immobility. The U.S.’s elasticity/immobility is just under one half, and Peru tops the chart at two thirds. 4  5

You might find the United States’ position in this graph surprising. For instance, it has more than double the immobility of Canada. The U.K. has a similar position.

In contrast to how surprising the high immobility in the U.S. is, high inequality in the U.S. is self-evident. You only have to cross any major city and you cannot avoid passing through both very poor and very rich neighborhoods. But the「American Dream」is ingrained in our psyche and identity, as is the idea that the U.S. is the「land of opportunity.」People are rewarded for their hard work, skills, and talents, not their bloodline. As the unalienable right of the pursuit of happiness is central to our Declaration of Independence, one tends to expect that the U.S. would at least compare well with other countries on a (im)mobility scale.

We all know of incredible success stories. My father managed to put himself through college and graduate school, and to become a nuclear physicist, even though his father had not completed high school and worked for a trucking company. Historically, the land of opportunity was an appropriate moniker. During immigration waves of the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, the country was expanding westward and experiencing extended economic booms (with some hiccups). Opportunities for employment and growth were abundant, especially for immigrants, many of whom were escaping poverty in the countries they were fleeing. People were moving to California and striking it rich. Education was valuable, but a less essential key to unlocking what was then a decent living. It was a golden age for growth, and the American Dream. In another period, after the Second World War, when manufacturing and the economy boomed, and the middle class flourished, climbing the economic ladder was also quite feasible.

However, by the time I started studying immobility about fifteen years ago, things were strikingly different. Upon first seeing parent-child correlations in education in the U.S., I thought that there must have been something wrong with the data. After some digging, I understood that all the figures painted the same story — the U.S. now ranks very high on the scale of parent-child correlations regardless of whether one measures income, education, wealth, or even longevity. Ranking high on these scales is not a good thing — it means high immobility .

Figure 6.2: The Great Gatsby Curve: a strong relationship between inequality (as measured by the Gini index of each country on the vertical axis, with 0 indicating no inequality and 1 indicating maximal possibly inequality (more on this below) and immobility (as measured by a country’s intergenerational earnings elasticity) across countries. Immobility data are from Corak (2016); the Gini indices are from the CIA World Factbook.

If you expected the U.S. to rank well on economic mobility, you are not alone. Many people’s perceptions of mobility and reality are mismatched. For instance, in Figure 6.1, Germany comes in at .32 while the U.S. has a rate of .47, almost one and a half times the rate of Germany. Yet, if you ask people whether they agree with the statement「If I work hard, I can improve my life,」then you find that almost 84 percent of Americans agree while only 62 percent of Germans agree. 6

The relationship between inequality and immobility was crystallized by Alan Krueger, who gave a famous presentation in January of 2012 when he was the chairman of the Council of Economic Advisors. Krueger presented the Great Gatsby Curve: the strikingly strong relationship between inequality and immobility that had been noted by Miles Corak in 2011. Krueger, in trying to find a name for the curve, offered a bottle of wine to the junior staffer who came up with the best name — a prize won by Judd Cramer, who named it after Gatsby’s difficulty in jumping social classes. 7 The tight relationship between inequality and immobility is pictured in Figure 6.2.

It is important to note that some aspects of the relationship between immobility and inequality are mechanical. If we compare a small and homogeneous country to a large and heterogeneous one, then we expect to find lower inequality and immobility in the small homogeneous country, all else being equal. For instance, if we only examined the children of engineers, we would see small amounts of inequality as most children would end up highly educated and well-paid, and also low correlation between parent and child income as the small differences in parents’ income would be mostly inconsequential in determining which children fared better or worse. The same would be true if we only examined the children of coal miners — there would be low inequality, as most would end up in the working class, and there would be almost no correlation in outcomes between parent and child since the parents would have almost identical characteristics. Much of immobility and inequality comes from the comparison across different segments of an economy, and so as an economy becomes more diverse then we should expect to see both more immobility and more inequality.

Nonetheless, the Great Gatsby Curve is picking up much more than a mechanical size effect. For example, its small size explains part of why Denmark is low on both immobility and inequality, but not all. Low-skilled workers in Denmark earn about 50 percent more than people in comparable jobs in the U.S., and they enjoy many more benefits. Thus, the lower inequality in Denmark compared to the U.S. derives in part from the fact that the relatively poor unskilled workers in Denmark are much better off than people with similar skills in the U.S. In a society in which most people can choose whether to work in lower- or higher-skilled jobs, there is a natural force that pushes wages of lower-skilled jobs up: one then has to entice workers to take such a job rather than having a large captive unskilled labor force with no other opportunities. In terms of immobility, one sees that the correlation in educational attainment between parents and children in Denmark is less than 10 percent, while in the U.S. it is almost 50 percent, despite the fact that they have similar percentages of the population attending college — so it is not just homogeneity driving the different positions on the curve. 8

Almost a quarter of Canada’s population consists of various minorities, and the country has sizable immigration, and a very diverse economy in terms of the spectrum of goods and services it produces. Yet, still it is among the most mobile countries in the world, and has inequality that is not too far behind that of the Nordic countries. What is interesting about the Great Gatsby Curve is why a country like Canada is low on both scales, while the U.S. and China are so much higher on both scales.

To emphasize that inequality is implied by immobility, I have flipped Krueger’s original Great Gatsby Curve. In Figure 6.2, immobility is on the horizontal axis and inequality is on the vertical axis — so we are viewing inequality as a function of immobility. The logic is that a substantial portion of inequality results from immobility. If all children were born into similar networks with the same opportunities of advancement — with similar parents, peers, and communities — then the only inequality would result from some random variation in their innate talents and personalities, as well as their choices, and some luck. If instead, children are born into very different networks — with different parents, norms, information, and opportunities — the resulting inequality is more extreme. So, part of the inequality in outcomes is driven by the difference in opportunities and mobility.

Ultimately, immobility and inequality are deeply intertwined: inequality also begets immobility, and there is feedback. The differences in parents, peers, and communities that constrain opportunities are due in part to inequality. But ultimately the entrenched networks of information and norms that are shaped by homophily constrain opportunities and behaviors, and so it is these forces behind immobility that are primary — and one can view inequality as a result and not as the root cause. This is different from the usual story that wealthy parents can afford to do more for their children.

This perspective is especially helpful in thinking about useful ways of breaking a vicious cycle and improving both immobility and inequality. It shifts the spotlight away from things like the tax rate on capital, instead to thinking about how to deal with the foundational social structures that drive the resulting immobility and inequality.

Inequality

「In a country well governed, poverty is something to be ashamed of. In a country badly governed, wealth is something to be ashamed of.」

 —  CONFUCIUS

Reducing inequality to a single score or index inevitably oversimplifies, just as we saw with measures of centrality and influence. Should we be measuring wealth, income, expenditures, consumption, employment, happiness, longevity, or some combination of these? How should we account for taxes and welfare payments? Should we look at families or individuals? How do we account for numbers of children? There are so many things to measure, but many of these are highly correlated, so the good news is that looking at some simple indices paints a pretty robust big picture.

Corrado Gini, an Italian statistician, demographer, and sociologist, developed a succinct and yet insightful measure of inequality in 1912. It is now known as the Gini index. It is ironic that Gini was a fascist and eugenicist. Gini was an early supporter and confidant of Mussolini. He did eventually have a falling-out with the fascist movement, but mainly because it meddled with his academic pursuits. Nonetheless, he developed what has become the most widely used measure of inequality

An easy way to think of the Gini index is as follows. 9 Pick two people from the society. How much more income does the richer person have compared to the poorer of the pair? If we see how big this is on average across all possible pairs then we are measuring how unequal the society is, on average. To be able to compare across countries we’ll normalize by twice the country’s average income. The「twice」makes sure that the Gini lies between 0 and 1 since we are comparing pairs of people: The extreme unequal case is one in which we take all of one of the pair’s income and give it to the other, in which case the difference of incomes between them is twice the average income; so dividing by twice the average normalizes this most extreme case to be 1. If everybody has the same income in a society the Gini is 0. 10

Figure 6.3 presents Gini indices of a selection of countries. Ginis generally range from .25 in very equal societies to .7 in extremely unequal societies, depending on the time in history and exactly how one measures income. 11

In these data, Denmark is the most equal society, with a Gini of about .25, and South Africa ranks as the most unequal among these countries with a Gini index of over .60, well over twice as unequal.

Just as we see inequality varying across countries, it has also varied over time. Clear pictures of income distributions going back centuries are hard to obtain, but with some careful detective work and extrapolations, people have put together estimates. 12 For example, although one might imagine that historic hunter-gatherer societies would be idyllic in terms of equality, they also exhibited significant inequality.

One historic hunter-gatherer society bordered Keatley Creek, which carries water down from the mountains of British Columbia. It lies a couple of hundred kilometers northeast of Vancouver. For thousands of years Keatley Creek was home to aboriginal societies that lived off the salmon that populated the river from spring to fall, as well as deer, fox, bear, and other animals that inhabited the forests of the region, and a variety of natural tubers, wild onions, raspberries, and other local plants. Although wild game can be abundant in the area, having access to the best sites makes a difference. For instance, there are some sites along the creek that are much better for fishing than others. Some families controlled access to prime sites, and that control was maintained across generations. Excavation of various longhouses suggests that the families who controlled the prime fishing and hunting sites had substantial storage of a wider variety of foods and large areas for sleeping and large hearths for cooking and heating, while other families lived nearby with relatively little storage and cooking. 13

Figure 6.3: Gini index data from the CIA World Factbook. The Gini index, ranging from 0 (no inequality) to 1 (extreme inequality), shown for selected countries.

This sort of inequality is not just anecdotal. As soon as humans began accumulating goods and exerting exclusive control over land, they began amassing wealth and transmitting it across generations. By examining various pastoral and horticultural societies, anthropologists have found a wide range of Gini indices in land and livestock holdings, from .3 to .7 — with averages in the .4 to .5 range. 14

Although inequality has been around for millennia, it really soared during the Industrial Revolution. The Industrial Revolution had unprecedented growth in productivity. Because of this growth, combined with poor regulation of monopolies, the top few in the industrializing nations gathered unmatched percentages of their countries’ wealth. As economies grew, inequality levels began to reach all-time highs. By the middle of the Industrial Revolution, England and Wales were estimated to have a Gini coefficient of .59 and Europe in general around .57. These are not far from the extreme of modern South Africa. The United States started out somewhat more agrarian and egalitarian, with an estimated Gini of .44 in 1774 just before its birth. However, by the time of the Civil War its industry was also emerging and the U.S.’s inequality began catching up to Europe’s, hitting a Gini of .51 by 1860 (including slaves). By the early twentieth century, the U.S. had overtaken much of Europe not only in industrial production, but also in terms of inequality — rivaled only by prewar Germany.

Countries that industrialized more recently, such as China, India, and parts of Africa, had lower Gini indices during the Industrial Revolution. As they have industrialized, their Gini indices have soared as well, as the richest segment of the population has gathered much of the newfound income, while many others are still living near the poverty level. Overall incomes have been rising, but much faster at the top. The rapid ascent of China’s Gini index over the past few decades is seen in Figure 6.4. 15

Figure 6.4: Gini indices for China, the United Kingdom, and the United States over time. Data for China and the U.K. are from the World Bank’s「All the Ginis」data set created by Branko Milanovic, version November 2014. Data for the U.S. are from Atkinson and Morelli’s 2014「Chartbook of Economic Inequality.」

Several factors temporarily counteracted the extreme levels of inequality that emerged with the Industrial Revolution. Unions grew, as did antitrust legislation and the regulation of monopolies by governments. Moreover, larger governments — spurred by the Great Depression and two world wars — increased taxation and redistribution. In addition, manufacturing technology required a larger labor force with new skills and the demand for labor pushed employment to new highs. A middle class emerged. In the decades following the Second World War, especially in Europe and North America, the middle class experienced unprecedented growth in its standard of living. The middle class not only gained in terms of the goods that were increasingly within their reach — from telephones to cars to radios and televisions — but the middle class also made huge gains as more of its members went on to higher education. 16 Gini indices dipped to some of their lowest points since the Industrial Revolution. We see that dip in Figure 6.4.

From roughly the 1980s to the present, several trends led to a resurgence of inequality in many countries around the world, including many not appearing in Figure 6.2. One trend is how technological change — instead of increasing demand for labor — is replacing and displacing labor. This is having a huge impact on the middle and lower middle classes in many countries. As technology has become increasingly sophisticated, it is able to replace labor in the provision of more and more goods and services. This does not mean that it puts people permanently out of work, but rather that now we have fewer automobile workers and travel agents and more dog walkers.

This transition can become ever more painful if not properly addressed. In the 1940s, Joseph Schumpeter coined the term「creative destruction」to describe the process by which new innovations make theretofore prevalent technologies and companies obsolete. We are witnessing it now on an unprecedented scale. Many innovations are replacing labor, except at the highest skill levels. Although obsolete machinery can be junked or recycled, what does a society do with its labor?

As an example, London taxi drivers have traditionally had to pass one of the most difficult tests on facts in the world, known as the Knowledge, in order to become licensed black-cab drivers. Many would spend years studying the complex map of London, memorizing tens of thousands of small streets, alleys, and landmarks, and learning to provide optimal routes between points quickly from memory. If you have ever taken a ride in a cab in London, it can be impressive. But such knowledge has been made obsolete by GPS technology and mapping apps — which not only calculate routes in an instant, but also adjust for current traffic conditions. This has led to contentious exchanges between the cab drivers and some of the British politicians who have suggested that the time for such exams is past.

Such advances in technology have lowered the labor needed in all types of production, from agriculture, to manufacturing, to services. Most travel bookings are now done online. Even famous retail stores are disappearing as online shopping takes over. We are on the verge of driverless cars and trucks, which will further transform the transportation industry. The recent effects of this have been most pronounced on the middle and lower middle classes — who have traditionally provided much of the labor in manufacturing and services that require a modicum of skills and experience but not higher education.

Figure 6.5 shows how much change in labor productivity there has been in the last four decades in manufacturing. Essentially, only 40 percent of labor is needed to do the same job as in the late 1980s. Not only is the effect enormous, it has also been rapid — more than a doubling in productivity in three decades. Of course, this has several consequences. It leads to more production both in terms of sheer quantity (say number of cars) and their quality (cars now have much more sophisticated electronics than they did three decades ago). But it also leads automobile manufacturers to require smaller workforces. This is not unique to manufacturing nor to recent times. For instance, gains in agricultural production have led the population of the U.S. involved in farming to decline from almost 70 percent in the early nineteenth century, to around 2 percent today, and not because humans are tightening their belts. At the same time, we saw dramatic increases in the quantity and quality of food produced.

Moreover, the explosive growth of production and exports in countries like China, Mexico, India, and South Korea has led to the internationalization of labor. As working classes in manufacturing and services emerged in much of Asia, South America, and parts of Africa, middle classes have shrunk in Europe and North America. It is important to note that most of that shrinkage was due to changing technology rather than globalization. For example, studies suggest that only between 10 and 20 percent of manufacturing jobs in the U.S. between 1999 and 2011 were lost to increased imports from China; most were lost to changes in technology. 17

Figure 6.5: This shows how many hours of labor are needed to manufacture the same output over time (measured in hours to produce the same GDP due to manufacturing, normalized relative to 1987). In 2016 it took less than 40 hours to produce what would have taken 100 hours in 1987. Data from the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics.

Figure 6.6: Agriculture has been a shrinking percentage of U.S. employment since the 1800s, and manufacturing began its slide in the 1950s. Although employment in services continues to grow, even parts of the service industry are seeing some drops in the amount of labor needed. Data from Piketty (2014), Table 2.4.

The combination of these forces is seen in Figure 6.6. The dramatic downward trend in agriculture is clear, and we are partway into the same trend in manufacturing. The drop in the labor used in manufacturing only started its decline after World War II, but is on an inevitable trend to tiny numbers too.

These trends are affecting not only the Americas and Europe, but Asia as well. For instance, as agriculture has been modernizing in India and China, similar trends have emerged in those countries. They are not yet down to having only 2 percent of their population being farmers, but they are halfway there. In China the fraction of the labor force working in agriculture dropped from 60 percent in 1990 to 28 percent in 2015, and in India over the same time period it dropped from over 60 percent to around 45 percent. Asia has experienced a growth in its workforce in manufacturing, but that is beginning to plateau even there, as technological advances are making quick inroads. Overall manufacturing production continues to increase, but the amount of labor used is flattening out.

The service industry (think health care, finance, education, media, hotel and restaurant services, retail, warehousing and transportation services, entertainment) has taken over as the dominant employer in the U.S. and Europe. The service sector is also rapidly growing in Asia, and is now the leading employer in China. It is taking off in India, with, for instance, the enormous growth of computer programming in cities like Bangalore, which now supplies code worldwide. 18 The labor force in services is also not immune to productivity growth. The London taxi situation is just one example. More generally, we see humans being replaced by computers and increasingly sophisticated programs: for filing taxes, teaching foreign languages, and trading financial securities, just to name a few.

These forces have led to widening gaps in wages, a trend that will only continue. In the U.S. in the 1950s, a typical worker with a college degree earned 50 percent more than a worker with only a high school degree or less. Now that difference is on the order of 100 percent: the earnings for college graduates have been increasing, while the earnings for those with only a high school degree are falling. 19 People with the highest levels of education are finding their skills amplified by modern technologies — they can make greater discoveries, reach more people, and perform tasks that were previously impossible. In stark contrast, people with middle to lower levels of skills are being replaced and displaced by technology.

The productivity explosion has not eliminated the need for low-skilled workers. Demand for theme parks has grown; the fitness and tourist industries are expanding, as are others that provide leisure goods. That which people used to do for themselves, such as cooking and cleaning, is now being done by low-skilled services. So we see increased demand for labor at the extremes — for design and management tasks that require high levels of skills, and for doing mundane tasks that require low levels of education and experience.

These changes have resulted in the percentage of people who end up with income higher than their parents’ to fall almost in half since the Second World War. Figure 6.7 shows that more than 90 percent of children born in 1940 earned more than their parents did — there was a booming middle class and growing prosperity and incomes for almost all Americans were rising from one generation to the next. Of those born in 1980 only 50 percent would earn more than their parents. The numbers are even worse when looking just at males, as nearly all born in 1940 were doing better than their parents at age thirty, but of those born in 1984, only 41 percent were — so 59 percent were doing worse than their fathers. The gains in overall productivity are being spread unequally: people in the upper-income brackets are more often than not doing better than their parents; people in the lower brackets are doing worse, even with education levels similar to those of their parents.

Figure 6.7: Comparing child’s to parent’s household pretax income measured approximately at age thirty and adjusted for inflation. Data from Chetty, Grusky, Hell, Hendren, Manduca, and Narang (2016a).

The composition of the labor force has not changed as rapidly as productivity. Thus, continued improvements in technology have led to a shortage at the very top where wages and productivity are highest, and a glut of labor where it is least valuable and wages are lowest. The percentage of twenty-five- to twenty-nine-year-olds who have a bachelor’s degree rose from just over 20 percent in 1974 to just under 30 percent by 2014. This might seem like a big increase, an almost 50 percent gain. However, this is far below the change in relative productivity. The slow adjustment of the population to required education has accelerated the wage premium of education, with the largest benefits going to those who are best educated.

This increasing gap in wages also means that the income concentrated among the top one percent of the population is reaching extremes not seen for a century in the U.S. or Europe. The top one percent in Europe earn about a tenth of the total income, while in the U.S. it is around a fifth. 20

It is important to note that even at the very highest levels, in both Europe and the U.S., roughly two thirds of the income going to the top one percent is labor income, and only about a third is from the returns to capital. Thus, even at these extremes, wealth advantages and investment returns are only part of the story. 21 Most of the rising inequality, especially below the top one percent, results from changes in labor income. Wages among the top one percent have increased more than two and one half times since the early 1970s; among the top 5 percent they have doubled; among the top 10 percent they have grown more than four and a half times. But among the bottom 60 percent, wages have gone up by less than a third over the same period. The rise in inequality is due to extensive changes in the relative wages of large segments of the population. 22

With growing gaps in income between those who go to college and those who don’t, an obvious and central question emerges: why aren’t more people getting higher education?

This circles back to immobility: there are strong social forces that make it more or less difficult for different people to acquire the skills that they need to succeed in the modern labor market.

Education

In the U.S., children with well-to-do parents are more than two and a half times more likely to graduate from college than children from poor families. 23 There are also corresponding differences across ethnicities. The percentage of people in their late twenties who have a college degree is an astonishing 72 percent among Asians, 54 percent among whites, 31 percent among African Americans, and 27 among Hispanics. 24 The causal mechanisms for these differences are intricate, as family income, ethnicity, parents’ education, culture, and community are all correlated.

Beyond which children go to college, there are also large differences in which colleges they attend. If you sit down in an introductory lecture in biology or economics or computer science in one of the most competitive universities in the U.S. (e.g., Ivy League schools, Stanford, MIT), the student sitting next to you is more than twenty times more likely to be from the wealthiest quarter of the population than from the poorest quarter of the population. 25 Someone from the wealthiest one percent in the U.S. is 77 times more likely to go to an Ivy League school than someone from the poorest 20 percent. 26 The students going to top universities are still overwhelmingly from the upper income brackets, despite substantial financial aid that can make those universities an excellent and affordable investment for students from low-income families.

This has consequences. Not surprisingly to anyone who has searched for a job, the college one attends makes a difference. The U.S. Department of Education has a scorecard by which it values the returns to colleges. The median salaries of graduates from Harvard, MIT, and Stanford are more than twice the median college graduate salary. 27

The eventual gaps in education are in play much earlier than college — and are already quite pronounced when children reach their teens. This is seen in Figure 6.8.

These differences begin just after childbirth. For instance, by the time they enter school, children of high-income families have heard an estimated thirty million words more than children of families on welfare. To arrive at this number, Betty Hart and Todd Risley 28 did something incredibly simple. They counted how many words parents spoke to their children. Parents on welfare spoke about 600 words per hour to their babies, while professional parents spoke more than 2,000 words per hour to their babies — more than three times more than the parents on welfare. This has an impact. Between 86 and 98 percent of the words that the children used were derived from their parents’ vocabularies — and they have very similar speech patterns to their caregivers. Hart and Risley also found that language skills at age three correlated significantly with language and reading skills at ages of nine and ten. 29

Early interaction snowballs. The benefits of helping children to develop at a very early age — in their preschool years — are highly leveraged. Teaching them things like patience and tenacity helps them learn other skills and opens doors for them throughout their lives. Teach a child to read earlier and they can start acquiring more knowledge at an earlier age, and this process accelerates. An improved ability to express themselves enables children to better navigate the world and learn more. The more they know, the better they perform in school and the more rewarding they find it, leading them to devote more effort to it. James Heckman, a Nobel Prize–winning economist and expert on early childhood education, put it this way:「skills beget skills in a complementary and dynamic way. Efforts should focus on the first years for the greatest efficiency and effectiveness. The best investment is in quality early childhood development from birth to five for disadvantaged children and their families」30

Figure 6.8: The difference in average test score from the poorest to the richest neighborhood is a full standard deviation (so moving from the bottom third of the distribution to the top third). The test scores are the sum of math and English language arts achievement scores for eighth-graders (typically thirteen- to fourteen-year-olds) in New York City, in standard deviations. The income for a neighborhood is measured in log of per capita income for the neighborhood (based on an average using the zip codes containing the schools). There are twenty observations binned to be of equal size scaled by income. Data from Fryer Jr. and Katz (2013).

Some differences in parenting are due to time constraints, but others can be traced to differences in beliefs of the parents as to how valuable it is to spend time with their children. For example, in a recent study in the U.K., parents in the lowest quarter of the income distribution answer very differently from those in the top quarter of the income distribution when asked whether they agree with the statement that:「My child develops at his/her own pace and there is little that I can do about it」. 31 Almost 40 percent of the poorer parents agree or are unsure about that statement, while less than 20 percent of the wealthier parents agree or are unsure. So, twice as many of the poorer parents are not sure whether they have much to do with their child’s development. One might attribute the beliefs of poorer parents to rationalizing the lower amount of time they spend with their children. But other questions suggest it involves more. When asked about the statement「My child is capable of learning to programme a software,」almost 80 percent of the richest parents thought it very likely, while only 50 percent of the poorest parents thought so. 32

The role of information in education extends well beyond the early formative years.

Despite all of the disadvantages that a child has growing up in a low-income family and community, the poorest people in the U.S. still manage to produce many high-achieving students by the end of high school: those with a high grade average (at least A–) and in at least the 90th percentile on college entrance exams (SAT or ACT). Seventeen percent of high-achieving students come from families in the bottom income quartile, which is half as many as come from the top income quartile (34 percent). 33

When all the effects of childhood are accumulated, the upper-income families have a two-to-one advantage over lower-income families in producing high-achieving children. That is enormous, but there is still a huge missing piece. Recalling our earlier numbers on education: there was more than a twenty-to-one ratio of upper-income compared to lower-income children at the top universities in the U.S. 34 So there is still a factor of ten difference by income level as to whether high-achieving students end up in a top university.

You might think that top universities are too expensive for the low-income students. This seems to be at most a minor factor. It is estimated that fewer than 8 percent of families in the U.S. are constrained in college choices by income. 35

Still, it is hard for people to know how much a college will end up costing them, just as the true cost of other large purchases are unclear. In many countries, you would be silly to walk into a car dealer and pay the sticker price for a car. Except for the hottest new models, the sticker price is the dealer’s starting point for a negotiation. As more consumers have become savvy, and many ask to see the invoice listing the price that the dealer paid for a car, the industry has begun to inflate those dealer invoices to include profit margins in various disguises, thus making it harder to know what lowest price a dealer would really accept. With a bit of research, and some shopping around, one can often negotiate a price significantly below the sticker price.

Similarly, the prices quoted for universities are starting points — the very most one could possibly pay. However, luckily, most universities are not as aggressive as car salesmen. For universities the difference between the starting prices and what most people pay is much more dramatic than the discounts with cars, and there is less haggling over the price. There are a variety of grants, fellowships, scholarships, and other programs that significantly reduce the price to most students. Only one third of full-time students pay the sticker price. In 2016, the average quoted price (inclusive of room and board) for a four-year private college in the U.S. was $44,000, but the average paid was only $26,000. Looking at public four-year universities in the U.S., the average net tuition and fees paid by the highest quartile is $6,330, while by the lowest quartile it is $–2,320. That is a minus sign in front of the last figure — the poorest quarter of the population receive payments that more than cover tuition and fees and also help pay costs of room and board. For private (nonprofit) four-year colleges, the richest quartile’s average cost in tuition and fees is $19,720, while it is $4,970 for the poorest quartile. 36

Even though the prices can be very low, many high school students and their families have little understanding of how it all works. They are either scared away from what they think the prices are, or they don’t even know that the opportunities for substantial financial aid exist. Again, a lack of knowledge keeps low-income students from even applying to schools that might be the best matches for them.

Rejoining Claire Vaye Watkins’s story gives us more insight here. As she states:

Most parents like mine, who had never gone to college, were either intimidated or oblivious (and sometimes outright hostile) to the intricacies of college admissions and financial aid. I had no idea what I was doing when I applied. Once, I’d heard a volleyball coach mention paying off her student loans, and this led me to assume that college was like a restaurant you paid when you were done. When I realized I needed my mom’s and my stepfather’s income information and tax documents, they refused to give them to me. They were, I think, ashamed. 37

The Usual Suspects: Institutions and Capital

Why should our well-being be so tied to that of our parents and the community into which we are born? This is by no means a new question, but one to which networks offer important insights. As we have just seen — information is key to understanding enormous differences in education and mobility. That information comes largely from the community within which the parents and children reside.

A notion of「capital」helps capture the information that one gets from one’s community. But we need a notion of capital that extends well beyond its classic conceptions. Classic forms of capital — such as「financial capital,」referring to financial assets that can be converted into other forms of capital or labor, and「physical capital,」referring to material resources, including land — play minor roles in our story.

Alfred Marshall was already stretching beyond the classic concepts to include「human capital」more than a century ago. Marshall stated,「The most valuable of all capital is that invested in human beings; and of that capital the most precious part is the result of the care and influence of the mother.」The more modern notion of「human capital」is the knowledge and skills that are used in any aspect of production and trade — including art, invention, design, operations, management, and marketing. Much of human capital, other than innate talent, is acquired: one learns how to do something — in school, by observing, as an apprentice, or by trial and error and experience.

The most relevant form of capital from our perspective is「social capital,」which is also the most recent concept of capital. 38 It refers to the favors, resources, and information that a person can access from their network of social connections or as a result of their reputation. 39

The social connections providing social capital include friendships, professional relationships, as well as memberships in or access to organizations, both private and public. This is the broadest form of capital, the squishiest in terms of definitions, and it involves things that are not easily measured, such as relationships and position in a network. 40 For instance, social capital played a major role in our story of the rise of the Medici. It was not just that the Medici could call upon many allies for favors, but also that the Medici’s unique position enabled them to coordinate others — which ultimately was a source of great power. The power that comes from that ability to coordinate others is also a form of capital as it can be very productive and valuable for the person wielding it. 41 Social capital relies on a variety of such concepts that are open to interpretation, such as reputation, position, friendship, and organization. Even homophily plays a role: a person can have a dependable and extensive network of connections and still lack access to vital resources and knowledge. Despite the difficulty of having a single, succinct, and easy to measure notion of social capital, it is such an important concept that we cannot avoid it.

As various forms of capital can often be converted into each other, having an abundance of one can enable one to acquire others. For instance, financial capital can be used to buy education and thereby human capital; and social capital leads to knowledge and opportunities that help build human capital and financial capital.

The fact that all the forms of capital are heritable — they can be passed from parents to children — has implications for immobility. Parents can give their children money, assets, and property. Parents are also their children’s teachers throughout life — they are a child’s first source of human capital, and play key roles in determining where children go to school and what and how they learn. Finally, and not to be underestimated, children are born into a particular family and community that form the foundations of their social capital. Moreover, the parents’ own social capital also makes a difference in how they act toward their children, for instance how aware they are of the value of education and what they can do to help their children excel. Homophily, along lines of geography, income, ethnicity, and culture, means that these communities are often separated from each other and can be quite insular — limiting information flow and locking communities into like-minded behaviors.

Communities are very clumped — so that wealthy and well-educated live together and poor and poorly educated live together. Fewer than 10 percent of people living in East St. Louis, Illinois, or Benton Harbor, Michigan, have a college degree, while more than 80 percent of adults do in Upper Montclair, New Jersey, as well as in Palo Alto, California. In Pahrump, Nevada, Claire’s hometown, 13 percent of the adult population over twenty-five years old have a bachelor’s degree. 42 If fewer than one in seven adults has a college degree, it is not surprising that many parents and students in the community know little about how to apply to college or how it can be paid for. Moreover, if most of those who did go to college went to a local community college or a noncompetitive school, then high-achieving students like Claire will lack network connections to people with knowledge of the opportunities that exist at top universities.

Communities are highly segregated by income and only getting more so as income inequality increases. In 1970, almost two out of three people lived in neighborhoods in which the median income differed by no more than one fifth from the U.S. median income. By 2009, that fraction had dropped to just over two out of five, and so a majority of people live in a neighborhood with a median income that is substantially different from the U.S. median. 43

In 1992 the U.S. Congress authorized an experiment leading to a major study of how neighborhood affects a family’s well-being. The centerpiece of the study was called Moving to Opportunity for Fair Housing. Four thousand six hundred families living in public housing around the U.S. (in Baltimore, Boston, Chicago, Los Angeles, and New York) were selected to participate. They were randomly assigned to three different groups. Some were given vouchers to help pay for rental housing — provided they used it in a low-poverty neighborhood — so this group had to move to a wealthier neighborhood in order to use their vouchers. Others were given vouchers that they could use anywhere they liked, so they could stay in the same neighborhood if they chose to. The remaining families were not given any vouchers and so were a control group who were observed for comparison.

The Moving to Opportunity program took place between 1994 and 1998, and the children involved are now adults and so we can see how their lives were changed. The effects are dramatic. 44 The biggest effects were for the children who were youngest when their families moved. Raj Chetty, Nathan Hendren, and Larry Katz combined information about who moved and who stayed behind from Moving to Opportunity with later tax data from the IRS to see how where a child grows up impacts his or her income and life. If the children were under thirteen years old when they moved to a low-poverty neighborhood, their earnings in their mid-twenties were almost one third higher than those of the control group, who were not given vouchers. The estimated benefit for an eight-year-old child of moving to a low-poverty neighborhood via such a voucher is three hundred thousand dollars in lifetime earnings. The children who moved were also one sixth more likely to go to college, and the colleges they attended were significantly higher ranked; and they were less likely to live in poor neighborhoods or be single parents (at the time of the birth of any children).

You might think that the luckiest families were the ones that could use vouchers anywhere they liked, but many only used the vouchers to save rent and did not move. The extra money was useful, but did not have as big an effect on the children’s lives as moving. The biggest gains were achieved by families who were required to move to low-poverty neighborhoods to use their vouchers. The income effect was about half for the group who were given vouchers but not required to move, and much of their gains actually came from those who did choose to move. Most notably, the effects on children are dramatically higher the younger they were when they moved. 45

The Moving to Opportunity study confirms, in a very stark way, what many social scientists and others have been suggesting for decades: neighborhoods and communities matter substantially. 46

Job Networks and Social Capital

Understanding social capital in terms of access to job opportunities also illuminates immobility. It helps explain why, even after graduating from the same college with the same major, children from low- and high-income backgrounds have different earning potentials. A recent study from the U.K. provides some orders of magnitude. 47 Without accounting for which colleges the students go to, there is a 25 percent difference in median earnings between graduates from high- and low-income families. Once one compares students who attend the same college and study the same subject, this drops to 10 percent. So, about three fifths (15 of the 25 percent) of the difference in outcomes based on family background comes from how that background influences which college students end up in and what they study, and then the remaining two fifths (10 of the 25 percent) comes from how family background determines what happens after students exit school. 48

The key to understanding the persistence of this difference is an appreciation of how important networks and social capital are in determining who gets which job and what pay.

「Among corporate recruiters, random applicants from Internet job sites are sometimes referred to as ‘Homers,’ after the lackadaisical, doughnut-eating Homer Simpson. The most desirable candidates, nicknamed ‘purple squirrels’ because they are so elusive, usually come recommended.」So said a human resources consultant. 49 Your chance of landing a job of any kind without some sort of connection is low.

Want a job at a bakery? Here’s a baker’s thought on the matter:「We’ll give anyone who walks in off the street an application. Likelihood of their being hired is slim, because we don’t know them….We don’t tend to just take people off the street because I’ve had a lot of bad experiences. That’s true of all ethnic groups including white Americans…it doesn’t matter.」50

Perhaps you just want to sort things at a recycling center. It should be easy to get that job without a connection. Think again:「We hire almost entirely by word of mouth. I have a couple of guys who brought in almost everybody, all the unskilled anyway. They bring in their friend, their cousin, their uncle, whatever. I have had maybe five guys come in off the street and only two or three have worked out even for a short time. We have a formal application, but it’s really only for record keeping purposes.」51

If you have ever struggled to find a job, you are not alone. Without well-connected friends or family it is hard to make it in any industry. The first detailed study of how people find jobs, published in 1951, was by George Shultz. 52 More than half of the textile workers he interviewed had found their jobs via friends. 53 As this might be special to the textile industry, Shultz also examined how workers in a variety of professions found their jobs. 54 For a wide range of jobs, secretaries, janitors, fork-lift operators, truck drivers, electricians, and many others, between 50 to more than 70 percent of jobs were found via friends.

Later studies confirmed that high percentages of jobs are found via friends and acquaintances throughout the spectrum of professions, from low-skilled jobs to managerial positions, and around the world. Finding a job without having some personal connection to someone already employed at a firm is more the exception than the rule. 55

Like it or not, your fate is closely connected to that of your friends. If they are well-situated, then they can help you. If they are unemployed, then you are out of luck. About fifteen years ago, Toni Calvó-Armengol and I began studying the impact of this fact. What does the fact that job information is networked mean for patterns of employment and wages, as well as decisions to seek education and to stay in the labor market? 56 Having more friends who are well-employed provides advantages in a number of obvious ways. It increases the chances that one of them will hear about a job opening and pass it along, which in turn increases the chances that you will find a job that is a good match.

To get a feel for how this serendipity works, consider a simple scenario. Suppose that each job interview you get has a fifty-fifty chance of being a good match and leading to a job offer. For the purposes of our illustration, let’s suppose if one does not work out, then the chance of the next one panning out is still fifty-fifty. If you get only one interview, then you have a one-half chance of landing a job. If you have two interviews, then your chance of landing a job goes up to three quarters — you only end up empty-handed if both opportunities don’t work out (which happens with a one half times one half, or one-quarter chance). If you have three interviews it goes up to seven eighths, and with four you are up to fifteen sixteenths. The additional effect of each cumulative interview opportunity is half as much as the previous — so there are diminishing returns and eventually additional interviews do not make a big difference. But the first few have a huge impact.

The effect is not just on the chances of landing a job, but also on the wage. Let’s suppose that if you get more than one job offer you can take the one with the higher pay. Suppose half of the jobs you might land are ones that you are overqualified for and pay only $15 an hour and the other half match well with your skills and pay $20 per hour. If you end up with one job offer, your expected wage would be the average, $17.50. If you get two offers, then you have a three-quarters chance that one of them will pay $20 per hour. With three offers, that probability goes up to seven eighths, and so forth. More friends lead to higher chances not only of employment, but also of a better job and higher wages.

It is important to note that one friend does not equal one interview, as not everyone you know is sitting on a lead to a job opening. Nor does one interview translate into half a chance at a job. This suggests that the network is more important than in the simple calculations above. Landing a job might require dozens of contacts who are willing to help you if they can, and landing a good match with a high salary might take even more.

This should come as no surprise — the more connections you have and interviews you land, the higher the chance that you end up employed and the higher your expected wage. 57 Having more employed friends yields a higher chance of landing a good job, or getting a better job if you are unhappy in your current position.

This has broader implications. For instance, friends’ employment ends up being correlated. Suppose we examine two different groups. Among one group there is high employment, and so when someone becomes unemployed they have many connections who can lead to potential interviews. Among the other group there is low employment, and when someone becomes unemployed they do not have many fruitful contacts. People in the first group will have higher chances of landing a job when they become unemployed, and will also have higher average wages. As Toni Calvó-Armengol and I found, as one group becomes more employed and the other less employed, the former gets a greater advantage and the gap grows. This dynamic trends away from equality. When information about jobs comes through a network, friends’ employment correlates: groups of friends in the aggregate tend to have either high employment or low — so feedback pushes groups toward the extremes. 58

Although this makes good sense, and turns out to be true, it is actually tricky to establish that your employment is correlated with that of your friends because job information is networked. Your employment being correlated with your friends’ employment is not convincing evidence that it is because of a network effect. Economists are skeptics — they want real proof. Why wouldn’t such a correlation be proof? Your friends are not a random draw from the population. For instance, it could be that hardworking and reliable people tend to be friends with each other, and less reliable and lazier people also tend to be friends with each other — a form of homophily that would also lead people who are friends with each other to have correlated wages and employment.

If we could measure how friendships impact employment when they are randomly formed, we would glean real evidence that the connections actually cause friends to have correlated employment and wages. But where can such randomly formed friendships be found? Ron Laschever, an economics historian, had a great idea: he examined a military draft, which assigns people into relatively small groups for extended periods of time and strong friendships develop.

When the United States entered the First World War, it relied heavily on the draft to fill out its army. In the spring of 1917, the U.S. Army consisted of just under 300,000 men. By late 1918 it had over four million men, almost three million of whom were drafted. Men who were drafted were randomly assigned to one-hundred-soldier groups called companies. Over the span of the two years that many served, these doughboys would spend all of their time with their company. 59 They trained together, traveled together, fought together, and risked dying together. The bonds that they formed were strong and lasting. A decade later their reliance on their company mates was still strong. As Laschever found, a 10 percent increase in the employment rate among a former soldier’s company mates in 1930 corresponded to a 4 percent increase in the chance that the soldier was employed. That is an impressive effect: it’s less than one for one, but it is still a 40 percent ratio. Moreover, this effect is just from the employment of the former soldier’s company, not even accounting for his connections to family and other friends. To be sure that it is really the connections to company mates and not something else about the military or the background of the soldiers, it is important to note that this relationship holds only relative to the soldier’s own company. A soldier’s employment does not vary with the employment rates of other companies that were formed around the same time and with similar demographic characteristics. So the soldier’s employment is substantially dependent on the employment of his friends.

The military is not the only organization that randomly assigns people into groups. Students entering universities are assigned to dormitories. David Marmaros and Bruce Sacerdote took advantage of the random assignment of freshmen at Dartmouth College to see how their eventual employment fates, four years later, were intertwined. 60 The study looked at not only whether people were employed, but also at their salaries. Upon graduating, a student’s employment was correlated with the fraction of their hall mates (students in rooms in the same hall in their dormitory) from freshman year who were employed: changing their hall mates from unemployed to employed led to a 24 percent increase in the chance that a student was employed compared to the average student. Moreover, each extra dollar that those hall mates earned led to a 26-cent increase in the students’ earnings, above that of the typical student. So, changes in hall mates’ outcomes corresponded to about one fourth as large a change in a student’s employment and salary.

These effects are really lower bounds on how important networks are in employment, as they look at only particular groups of friends — Army buddies and college friends. As we age, the full list of all of our former acquaintances becomes enormous — there are thousands of people whom we end up knowing in some way. It turns out that even casual acquaintances matter. The person who sat next to you in history class in school, and just happened to bump into you last month and hear that you are between jobs, could be the person who puts you in touch with your new employer. A small number of our relationships remain strong ones — people we know well, can rely on for help in most any circumstance, and interact with frequently. Other relationships fall into many categories: childhood friends with whom we have occasional contact or could reach out to if needed; colleagues and acquaintances we have spent some time with but interact with only infrequently; distant relatives; friends of friends….Many of these are weak relationships — people we know and could potentially contact for information or a small favor, but with whom we are in contact irregularly, or whom we see regularly but in a limited context.

This distinction between strong and weak relationships was the centerpiece of one of the most influential studies in the social sciences in the last half century. 61 Mark Granovetter examined the extent to which information about jobs flowed through weak versus strong ties among a group of people in Amherst, Massachusetts. 62 Granovetter found that only a sixth of jobs that came via the network were from strong ties, with the rest coming via medium or weak ties; and with more than a quarter coming via weak ties.

We have already seen that strong ties can be more homophilistic (comparing Figures 5.3 and 5.4). 63 Our closest friends are often those who are most like us, and live close to us, work with us, or study with us. This means that they might have information that is most relevant to us, given our shared backgrounds and interests, but it also means that it is information to which we may already be exposed. In contrast, our weaker relationships are often with people who are more distant both geographically and demographically. Their information is less redundant. Even though we talk to these people less frequently, we have so many weak ties that they end up being a sizable source of information, especially of information to which we don’t otherwise have access.

Although any single strong tie can still be more influential than a weak tie, 64 casual acquaintances and former colleagues still make a big difference. Marie Lalanne and Paul Seabright 65 traced the pay packages of 22,389 top executives of 5,064 European and U.S. companies to their networks of connections. They counted how many former colleagues a given person has who are now in influential positions. If you once worked together with John and Alison, and now Alison is a top executive at some company and John is unemployed, then Alison counts as a connection but John does not. Some of these are strong ties, but many are weak — just people you happened to work with at the same company at one time. And these connections are only part of a person’s network: former co-workers, so it will underestimate network effects. But these connections do capture people who are in the same profession and most likely to have relevant job information. The typical (median) executive in this network has more than sixty connections, and the best-connected executives have several hundred connections or more. What Lalanne and Seabright show is that if you compare an executive with the median number of connections to one who is in the 75th percentile, all else held constant — so, take an executive with around sixty connections and add a few dozen connections — then the executive with more connections has a salary that is 20 percent higher.

The correlation of connections with salary also turns out to be significantly higher for men than women: having more connections leads to a bigger increase in salary for men than women. This might help explain why men end up with wages more than a fourth higher than women, despite women having slightly higher education levels on average. 66 This is consistent with other findings of women being disadvantaged when it comes to referrals. For example, Lori Beaman, Niall Keleher, and Jeremy Magruder, in a study in Malawi, found that men tend to recommend other men even if they know well-qualified women, while women’s tendencies to refer other women are not enough to overcome the effect. 67

How this can have a big impact is then easy to see. Consider a profession with more men than women. Both men’s and women’s former colleagues will tend to be predominately men. Gender homophily also means that men are more likely to stay in touch with each other, and women with each other. Even though over time men and women might have similar numbers of past colleagues, since most of their ties will be to men, given the homophily women will have fewer ties to people who actually refer them for a job when they have the chance. In higher management ranks, which are heavily male populated, this bias can have a big kick. As we saw in our simple calculations, having a few more opportunities can result in a sizable difference in the quality of the job and salary.

Why are employers so enamored with referrals? If they were hiring the best talent out of the full pool of whoever applied, that would eliminate many of the distortions that networks introduce into labor markets. There must be gems among a wider pool of applicants, so why limit oneself to hiring friends and acquaintances of current employees?

Just as homophily helps in navigating a network, it helps employers find employees with specific characteristics. Suppose that you run a business and you need to hire someone who can work nights and weekends; or you need someone who likes to travel and speaks Spanish; or perhaps you need a programmer with knowledge of certain kinds of databases. If you already have employees who are filling such roles, then homophily tells you that they are very likely to be friends with someone who is similar to them. Your current workers’ friends are likely to be the sort of people you need to fill your opening. Who better to help you find a programmer with the skills to design certain types of software than your current programmers who are already working on related software? Not only might they know someone who is qualified, but they also have an excellent idea of exactly what the position requires. Random applicants to some advertisement that you post — the「Homers」described earlier — are much less likely to match well with the needs of the position.

When you call customer service with questions about your credit card, the person you are talking to is likely in the middle of a busy shift. You are one of roughly five thousand calls that the person on the other end of the line is handling a month. Finding and retaining the staff to handle such calls is a challenge. When a call center finds someone who works out, having them refer their friends is a good way to find others. Indeed, in one study, homophily was strong and people referred by current employees were similar to those employees in terms of gender, education, tenure in previous/current job, and prior/current wage. 68 It is then not surprising that those referred are almost twice as likely as other applicants to get a job (11.9 to 6.7 percent); and not only are they more likely to be interviewed, but more than 50 percent more likely to be hired conditional on being interviewed. Moreover, on average they were over $400 cheaper in terms of interviews and related costs to hire, but only cost a $250 bonus to the person who referred them. 69

Referrals from employees, and other personal connections, also contain information about the reliability and other personal attributes of a potential applicant. Each year, when we hire new assistant professors in our economics department at Stanford, we end up with four or five hundred applications for one or two positions. Some are easy to sort through as they are missing some basic qualifications, but that generally still leaves hundreds of applications out of which we have to identify the few candidates who are most likely to be highly successful. Are they hardworking and creative? How well do they collaborate with others? How well will they fare as a teacher and mentor? You will rarely find answers to such questions in a résumé or even by reading things the applicant has written. Letters of reference are vital, but how can you trust what is written there?

To test whether referrals convey useful information about an applicant’s potential performance that an employer could not predict from just looking at a résumé, Amanda Pallais and Emily Glassberg Sands did some hiring experiments via an online work site. 70 They found that referred workers performed better and stayed longer, beyond what you could predict from their résumés: the fact that an applicant was referred in and of itself meant that the person was likely to outperform someone hired who had similar traits but who was not referred. 71

Feedback and Persistent Differences in Behaviors: A Social Tug-of-War

The role of networks in providing job opportunities leads to more general complementarities in decisions. If many of my friends drop out of the labor force, then it becomes harder for me to find a good job, or one at all, and easier for me to find work illegally. Their dropping out can also signal to me that working illegally might be the best decision for me as well. My friends may even directly pressure me to follow their lead.

All of these forces — from parents, peers, and community — lead to cascades of behavior, just as we saw in our discussion of diffusion and contagion. The interesting twist comes when we couple these forces together with geographic and demographic homophily. The resulting contagion behaves very differently from the purer contagion that we saw earlier.

That contagious diseases could jump stark boundaries in social networks was particularly evident in feudal societies. Nobles lived separate lives from peasants, with strong differences in literacy, diet, and wealth; but when a disease spread it knew no boundaries. Even a few interactions between classes enabled a disease to become rampant among all classes. The list of monarchs who died alongside many of their subjects during the smallpox outbreaks in the eighteenth century is impressive: King Louis I of Spain (1724), Tsar Peter II of Russia (1730), Louise Hippolyte, Princess of Monaco (1731), King Louis XV of France (1774), Maximilian III Joseph, Elector of Bavaria (1777), Alfred, Prince of Great Britain (1782). 72

In contrast, decisions such as whether one wants to go to college are influenced by many people around you and the outcome is more like a tug-of-war. It is not enough to meet just one person who went to college to know what it is about and how to get there and to become motivated to go. Many of our decisions end up being driven by that with which we are most familiar and who influences us the most. This differs from disease contagion, as it is enough to know one person with smallpox to catch it.

Thus, although many diseases easily jump across social boundaries, behaviors that depend on reinforcement and strength of interactions do not.

To see this most starkly, let us look at an example of a「drop-out game」that is representative of some settings that Toni Calvó-Armengol and I examined. 73 We will keep the illustrative game simple: a person decides either to stay in school or to drop out (or to go to college or not, or to commit a crime or not, etc.). Most importantly, the person decides to drop out if more than half of that person’s friends have dropped out. This is the social tug-of-war: one ends up pulled in the direction of most of one’s friends. But to add the critical ingredient, homophily, let us suppose that there are two types of people: solids and blanks. Solids tend to be friends with solids and blanks with blanks, as pictured in Figure 6.9.

Figure 6.9: Homophily and dropouts: A society in which there is homophily: a majority of the blanks’ friends are blanks and a majority of the solids’ friends are solid.

Let us see what happens beginning with two dropouts among the blanks to seed the process. Figure 6.10 shows how this behavior cascades to infect all of the blanks, but stops short and does not infect any of the solids. Homophily acts like a firewall — behaviors are completely different on different parts of the network.

To see how homophily was necessary for the spread of dropout behavior among the blanks, note that if we rewire the network to have more cross-type relationships, the dropout behavior stops early. This is pictured in Figure 6.11.

Although this example is overly stylized, it is easy to see how the logic in Figures 6.9–6.11 extends to richer settings. Although homophily hardly slows a disease at all, it can stop behaviors in their tracks. Homophily enables different norms, and behaviors appear on different sides of a divide, whether it be voting, observing religious tenets, or becoming educated. 74 These simple forces, coupled with the strong divides along racial, income, and caste lines that we see in homophily, can explain much of the observed correlation in education choices. 75 Moreover, homophily affects not only whether college is in a student’s future, but also many related behaviors such as how much time they spend studying and paying attention in class, what they do with their free time, and which professions they choose to pursue.

Figure 6.10: Cascading dropout decisions, starting with two dropouts. Each person does what a majority of his or her friends do: if the majority of a person’s friends have dropped out then he or she drops out too; if a majority are still in, then the person stays in.

Figure 6.11: Homophily and dropouts: Reducing the homophily can stop the spread of the behavior. In this example, changing one key link between two blanks to instead connect a blank to a solid stops the spread of the behavior.

Takeaways: Network Divisions, Immobility, and Inequality

Inequality and immobility are like social cancers. One can treat the symptoms through taxation or income redistribution, but although these actions can be ameliorative they do not cure the disease. Fortunately, immobility and inequality are easier to diagnose than many cancers. But just as with cancer, many factors, often interacting, lead to immobility and inequality. Understanding what causes them helps us to prescribe a cure. Entrenched forces of homophily, coupled with the information and opportunities that flow through one’s network, are fundamental forces behind investments in education, immobility, and inequality.

So what does a network perspective suggest as a cure? Let’s start by ruling out things that will not work here.

One way to eradicate immobility and inequality is radical: by eliminating private property and forming communes, such as Israel’s kibbutzim founded in the 1930s and 1940s. My colleague Ran Abramitzky has been studying how the kibbutzim have evolved and the challenges of establishing such a fully equal society. 76 Although the kibbutzim do have some range in ideologies, many of the typical founders and early members were Jews from Eastern Europe who had strong Marxist tendencies and full equality in mind. There was no private ownership of property, all income was shared collectively, and members ate in communal dining halls. Even children were raised communally, living separately from their parents in order to free women from disproportionate burdens of child-rearing. Children were taught altruism, cooperation, the importance of the collective, and socialism. At the peak of the kibbutzim, in the first decades after Israel became a state, over 5 percent of the country’s population lived in a kibbutz. Many of the kibbutzim were located in key locations that helped secure the Israeli state, and they provided much needed safety nets not only as people were forming new settlements, but also a new country. For example, substantial numbers of new members fell ill with malaria and were sustained by the collective as they adapted to their new environment. In the 1950s and 1960s, the kibbutzim were some of the most productive parts of the Israeli economy.

By the 1980s, however, the kibbutzim were experiencing steady decline in relative population. By the year 2000 only 2.5 percent of Israel’s population lived in a kibbutz. They also experienced a brain drain: the most educated members were exiting at a much higher rate than well-educated members were joining. New membership was coming mostly from those born in the kibbutz and newcomers with low education levels. The work ethic in some of the kibbutzim also sagged. The incentives to participate and work hard were muted in a fully egalitarian system that relied entirely on the ideology and altruism of the members. As the most productive members began leaving or working less, some kibbutzim faced financial crises. They were forced to back away from full egalitarianism; many kibbutzim instituted policies by which members were allowed to keep some of their income and could hold private property; collective sharing was now only partial. Many even began contracting out for health and education services. By 2004 only 15 percent of the kibbutzim were full cooperatives.

The transformation of the kibbutzim was seen on larger scales in other communist systems, such as the former Soviet Union and China, which transitioned to market economies, due to not only incentive problems, but also the logistical challenges of running massive planned economies. What was clear was that there are trade-offs among equality, incentives, and productivity. The huge advantage of market-based economies in allocating goods and services and providing incentives for innovation and growth means that most of us will have to tackle inequality and immobility by means other than the elimination of private property and the institution of communes.

In so doing, we are faced with some inexorable trends. Advances in technology will continue to displace low- and middle-skilled labor and increase the power and leverage of high levels of education and skills, pushing the remaining workforce into jobs that require little special training and are increasingly mundane. In addition, in so far as markets are global, over the next few decades more of the world’s population will be pulled out of poverty and more will become better educated. To anyone paying attention, the growth of Chinese universities in both quality and scale is impressive. Dramatic demographic changes in one country, such as increasing labor supplies at all skill levels in India and China, have international ramifications. Acknowledging these facts leads to several observations and prescriptions.

Governments are always tempted to shore up the demand for labor in domestic industries with trade barriers and immigration policies. However, given that it is technology that is driving the displacement of lower-skilled labor, such policies will do little to stimulate employment, and might result in catastrophic collateral damage (as we will see in Chapter 9). 77

As it is impossible (at least in the short run) to have everyone highly educated, this will lead to increasing polarization in the workforce and in the political sphere.

Past is prologue here. Throughout the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, when farm labor was declining, compulsory education expanded, requiring that children attend school until a minimum age (between fourteen and eighteen years in most countries). This provided more literate populations and flexible workforces, better able to fit into the growth of more skilled blue- and white-collar jobs. 78 The current technological changes are pushing the returns on skills to much higher levels, suggesting that countries should be investing in ever higher levels of education to match technological advances. Looking forward to our Star Trek future, labor will be reallocated in ways that we can only imagine; skills and education will be needed in subjects that we cannot currently conceive of.

To deal with the income disparities between high- and low-skilled labor, some support at the lower levels of income is needed. The good news here is that the world is much more prosperous than ever before, and the enormous technological changes have led to a bounty that can be shared. Finland, among others, has been experimenting with what seems to be a radical approach. They are randomly selecting thousands of unemployed Finns and simply giving them money and benefits without caveat — these beneficiaries don’t have to stay unemployed or prove that they are looking for work or enroll in any programs; they simply get the money. This idea of「universal basic income」has been gaining traction, and similar trials are on the horizon in Canada, India, Kenya, the Netherlands, and even a private venture in California. 79 It is an obvious, but highly controversial, policy in response to an ever-polarizing workforce. 80

Regardless of the success or failure of universal basic income, such a policy still does not address the disparities in opportunities that underlie immobility, and which are both unjust and counterproductive. Much of this, in one form or another, traces back to the homophily that limits information and opportunity flows to both parents and children, leading to systematic underinvestment in education among lower-income households that have little experience with colleges or contact with highly educated people. We also saw that homophily leads to a variety of feedback effects. Limited opportunities and knowledge of those opportunities further limits the community’s access and knowledge. Network feedback also leads a community to have correlated employment and wages, and also correlates the decisions of its members on things like investing in human capital, choosing a profession, and dropping out.

So, how do we counter the deleterious effects of homophily? Making dramatic changes in people’s networks is likely a losing battle — one can try to raise awareness of homophily and steer networks in the right direction, but large-scale social engineering has a history of disasters; and one cannot move everyone to opportunity. Nonetheless, establishing more ties by providing short-term moves should still make a difference, especially as weak ties can be valuable.

The more immediate prescriptions are to undo what homophily does: to provide information and opportunities where they are lacking. Information is cheap and can be very effective. It is like preventive medicine, which saves enormous costs later. Helping people understand the importance of a few behaviors, and providing periodic but forceful nudges, can be remarkably successful. 81 Informing parents about the importance of early education and how to help their children learn, from preschool onward, is the easy starting point. The diffusion of information and behavior via networks means that feedback will help here — the more information is out there, the easier it is to get it to spread. In addition, removing obstacles that handicap lower-income working parents from giving children attention, such as providing affordable preschools and easy access to after-school programs, can also help. The impact of such programs is already visible: the percentage of four-year-olds in state-funded preschools has doubled since 2002, and the readiness gap between high and low incomes is correspondingly falling. 82

The next level of information concerns opportunities for higher education and careers. As becomes clear from Claire’s story, many high school students lack basic information about the world beyond their community. Informing students about the value of an education has been found to help their attendance and performance, from the Dominican Republic to Madagascar. 83 Providing basic information — along with some training and oversight — also helps in recruiting low-income students to universities. Stanford student Jeffrey Valdespino Leal’s parents did not graduate from high school. He had thought that colleges outside his state would be too expensive until he was invited to a workshop where he learned about financial aid. Then the American Talent Initiative financed by Bloomberg Philanthropies connected Jeffrey with a student at Williams College who helped him with his essays and applications. As Jeffrey states,「If there could be more lower-income students here, it would be great, because we’ve shown we can do just as well as the other students.」84 Simply providing information to kids in high school has its limitations, as just because a teenager is told what they need to do to improve their future does not mean that they will do what is necessary, especially if no one else around them is doing it. 85 The aid from a college student was likely instrumental in helping Jeffrey out. In addition, such help can be leveraged by network feedback: much like our dropout game, people tend to follow the herd (more on this in Chapters 7 and 8). There is much more leverage in concentrating efforts and getting groups to change behavior than just providing information or helping a single student here and there. As more students are drawn from low-income communities, that will lead to further increases. The resulting increased mobility not only levels the playing field, but should lead to increased productivity.

In the end, given the growing premium to high-skilled labor and cost of inequality, it becomes clear that the countries with the brightest future will be those with the highest levels of education and the lowest hurdles to mobility. Technological changes disadvantage countries with large fractions of workers who have no choice but to be low skilled, and such countries will be left behind. 86 Educating people from the full range of the income distribution becomes vital, whether they come from the slums of Kolkata, rural Mongolia, or a poor neighborhood in Chicago. Increasing mobility not only addresses moral obligations to provide equal opportunities, but also lowers future health, welfare, and law enforcement costs, and increases economic productivity. It is essential for addressing widening inequality and for growing economies. One of the main insights that networks offer is how coupled decisions, opportunities, and outcomes are across network connections in a society. These complementarities mean that there are benefits from carefully coordinating policies, not to just randomly help individuals, but to take advantage of that complementarity. Helping one person each in two different communities can have less impact than helping two people in one community, which can then start to overcome thresholds to get others to act (and more on this in Chapter 8). Understanding the nature of the complementarities can lead to drastically different policies than just targeting categories of people without taking advantage of their network positions and influence.

