The caste system in India permeates the life of its citizens, guiding whom they marry, which professions they undertake, which god(s) they worship, and with whom they interact on a daily basis. The caste system is complex even to those living within it. It has strong roots in Hinduism, but also involves hundreds of millions of Sikhs, Jains, Muslims, and Christians. It evolved over thousands of years, in a society of local tribes and clans, amidst periods of sweeping changes in the ruling classes. India is so large and diverse that the caste system morphs according to local customs and traditions. Despite efforts on the part of British magistrates to formalize a simple caste hierarchy under their rule in the nineteenth century, the system remains complex and nuanced. Even though it defies description, I will try to give an idea of some of its basic structure.

The caste system can be thought of as having four primary groupings — known as「varnas」or「colors」 — which have hierarchical connotations: Brahmins (priests and teachers), Kshatriyas (warriors and rulers), Vaisyas (farmers, merchants, artisans), and Shudras (laborers and peasants). There are also「outcasts」and「untouchable」groups outside of the four varnas that include what are now often known as the Dalits (「other laborers」) and the Adivasis (various tribal and aboriginal groups). Attached to this is the idea that souls are infinitely lived while bodies and personalities are temporary. Your「karma」depends on the rightness or wrongness of your beliefs and behaviors and can accumulate over lifetimes. Good karma can lead to rebirth in a higher caste. Ultimately, if you come to know your soul then you can achieve「moksha」: a divine state of well-being that frees you from the endless cycle of rebirth. The idea that your caste reflects your past karma leads to a perception that your caste is somehow deserved and that you should not aspire to caste mobility, at least not within this lifetime.

Subdividing the varnas are thousands of「jatis」or「subcastes,」which more finely align with birthplace, hereditary profession, marriage rules, and religion, and make the system even more constraining in terms of advancement or interaction across groups. 1 Understanding the caste system is further complicated by the fact that although caste correlates with things like wealth and education, there are occasional anomalies, such as untouchables becoming famous politicians or businessmen, as well as Brahmins living in abject poverty.

The rigid limits on opportunity and social mobility imposed by the caste system have led to extensive government programs to lessen its impact. Some of the castes and subcastes are considered disadvantaged and recognized for affirmative action by India’s constitution as well as various other laws and programs. Those castes are primarily what are known as the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes, including the untouchable groups outside of the main varnas as well as a multiplicity of aboriginal groups. Because the caste system is anchored in religious beliefs, loosening its grip on society is a challenge. For instance, a system of reservations provides a minimum number of slots in universities, politics, and government for members of the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes. This system is loved and hated depending on one’s caste and religious beliefs.

In a country in which more than a fifth of the population lives below a very low poverty line, many people outside of the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes are also severely disadvantaged. More than a third of India’s population falls into a category called Other Backward Castes, who in some regions and circumstances are also recognized for affirmative action. All others are often referred to as the Forward Castes (or General Castes or General Merit castes).

Although the caste system defies simple description, its consequences do not. Each caste is a minority of the population, so if caste did not matter most people would marry outside of their own. A recent comprehensive study of cross-caste marriages, however, found that only 5 percent of Indians marry outside of their caste, 2 despite government subsidies for inter-caste marriages. In fact, more than two thirds of the women in the study had met their spouses for the first time on their wedding day. Marriages are still largely arranged relationships, respecting rigid community norms, and often are as much about the extended families as the husband and wife.

The impact of caste goes far beyond marriages. You can see the strength of the divisions created by the caste system in Figure 5.1. Pictured is a network of favor exchange among the households in one of the villages from our microfinance study discussed in Chapter 2. Here nodes are households, and two of them are connected if they borrow from and/or lend kerosene and rice to one another. In such a village kerosene is the main fuel used for cooking and heating, and rice is a primary source of sustenance. In many ways, this network is really the backbone network of the village: households that share kerosene and rice often also lend money, provide advice, and give medical help to one another.

In Figure 5.1, the round solid nodes are the households that lie within the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes, while the square checkered nodes are those belonging to the Other Backward and General Castes. Even in such a small village, people are fifteen times more likely to exchange favors within caste groupings than across them, despite the substantial gains to be had from cross-caste diversification.

Figure 5.1 also makes clear that visualizing networks reveals things that otherwise might escape our notice.

This network reveals a clear additional division within this Indian village, indicated in Figure 5.2. There are groups within the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes that do not interact — there is just one connection between them. These reflect further divisions. Some subcastes interact almost seamlessly and others not at all — and it is not always easy to predict which will without being part of the local culture.

These sharp divides have profound consequences. Villagers experience health problems, crop failures, wildly changing employment, in addition to a variety of needs for cash, such as dowries. They don’t have insurance or much, if any, savings: they rely on each other for help. It is easy to see that such divides become a problem when one considers risk sharing. In a drought, farmers all suffer and cannot help each other. If they interact only with other farmers, then the farmers in a village can be starving while the artisans may have more work than they can handle, or vice versa. It has been estimated that between 87 to 90 percent of the money that people gave or lent to others in some villages like these went to someone within the same caste, and that risks were far from being shared well across castes, mirroring the network pictured in Figure 5.2. 3

Figure 5.1: Divisions within a rural Indian village. Nodes are households and a link indicates that the pair of households report that at least one borrows kerosene and rice from the other. The round (solid fill) nodes are households that fall within the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes: those especially considered for affirmative action by the Indian government, and the square (checkered fill) nodes are the Other Backward and General Castes. The positioning of nodes is by a spring algorithm that groups nodes more closely together when they are linked to each other (and is not based on geography, caste, or other household attributes). The frequency of links among pairs of households when both are within the same caste grouping is fifteen times higher than when they are in different caste groupings.

Figure 5.2: The network pictured here has obvious additional divisions that are not captured by the broad caste split, and that are indicated here with the dashed curves.

One reason for the entrenchment of the caste system is that it offers tremendous advantages to those in privileged positions, and so they have incentives to perpetuate it. However, this perspective misses an impediment to overcoming the caste system. Caste is so ingrained in the identities, culture, and religion of many Indian citizens that even many of those who are underprivileged, including those with ambitions for bettering their lives and those of their children, view marrying and many interactions with others outside their caste as abhorrent. Contact across some caste boundaries would be thought of as disgraceful to both sides.

Homophily

「Equals, the proverb goes, delight in equals…and similarity begets friendship.」

 —  SOCRATES, IN PLATO, PHAEDRUS

Such strong and sharp divisions among groups are not unique to India and its caste system, but appear throughout the world and for a variety of reasons.

The general tendency of people to interact with others who are similar to themselves was named「homophily」by Paul Lazarsfeld and Robert Merton (1954). The etymology of the word is clear — 「homo」refers to same, and「phily」to love or fondness.

Figure 5.3 provides another example of homophily, in a very different context from the caste system in India. It shows how the friendships within a high school in the U.S. are divided along racial lines. Again, friendships are more than fifteen times more likely to be within race (here mainly black and white) than across race. 4

Figure 5.3: Self-reported friendships in a high school from the Add Health data set. Students (nodes) with bold stripes are self-reported as being「Black,」the nodes with center dots are「Hispanic,」the nodes with light gray fill are「White,」and the few remaining nodes are「Hispanic」(center dots) or「Other/Unknown (blank).」The figure was drawn using a spring algorithm, moving friends closer together and nonfriend pairs apart. The algorithm did not know the nodes’ races, so the separation is the result of the friendship patterns.

Figure 5.4: The same network as in Figure 5.3, except now only「strong friendships,」in which the two people did at least three things together in a week (hung out together after school, spent time together on a weekend, talked on the phone [data from the mid-1990s], etc.), are included. The split in the network is even more pronounced.

We can also measure the intensity of a friendship since the data include how many activities students perform with each other. In Figure 5.4, I include only friendships in which two students engage in at least three activities per week together — in short, only close friendships. This was the network we saw in Chapter 1. As you can see, cross-race friendships disappear almost entirely — there remain only a handful of friendships between whites and blacks in the entire school of 255 students. 5

One can see such patterns in all sorts of important relationships. For instance, economist (and friend and coauthor) Roland Fryer found that fewer than one percent of whites in the United States marry blacks even though blacks make up more than 10 percent of the population. 6 Similarly, fewer than 5 percent of blacks marry whites even though whites make up more than 60 percent of the population. 7

It is rare to find societies without homophily, and it occurs along many dimensions including gender, ethnicity, religion, age, profession, education level, and can even be seen in genetic markers. 8 It is hard to find a characteristic for which homophily is not present. Demographer Lois Verbrugge, in surveying adult populations in the U.S. (Detroit) and in Germany (Alt Neustadt), found that 68 percent of women named a woman as their closest friend and 90 percent of men named a man as theirs. Homophily was strong on all the characteristics she asked about: age, years of schooling, profession, religion, marital status, and employment status. 9

Homophily is seen across history and types of societies. In fact, strong homophily exists even in hunter-gatherer societies. The Great Rift Valley runs thousands of kilometers, from Eritrea and Djibouti in the northeast of Africa, down through Ethiopia, then through Kenya and ultimately through Tanzania to Mozambique. 10 The valley was created by a slow splitting of the African plate. Its fertility has sustained life for millions of years, and the erosion and resulting sediment have been excellent protectors of fossils and artifacts. It gave us Lucy — a skeleton of a hominid ancestor of humans from more than three million years ago. It also preserved the earliest known tools, and animal bones with tool marks on them, also dating from between two and a half to three and a half million years ago. Remarkably, perhaps, there are still nomadic hunter-gatherer peoples inhabiting the Great Rift Valley, providing a lens into ways of living that date back millennia. One such society is the Hadza, who live around Lake Eyasi at the south end of the Great Rift Valley in Tanzania, neighboring the Serengeti. The roughly one thousand Hadza have retained their culture despite attempts by missionaries to convert them and encroachment by farmers and herders.

Theirs is not an easy life. Day to day, they move in accordance with available sources of food. They live mostly on fruits, honey, tubers, greens, occasional eggs, and sporadic meat, which they hunt with poisoned arrows. Obtaining calories is no easy task. Honey is often found by following birds that subsist on beehives often found dangerously high in tall trees. Hunting usually takes place in dry times, when animals are forced to gather around limited water sources. The lake is also subject to wild seasonal and annual fluctuations, sometimes full of water and hippopotami, and other times simply a dry and cracked bed of mud.

The unpredictability of available food also means that sharing is essential to staying alive. Coren Apicella and colleagues 11 studied the networks among the Hadza: who likes to be with whom in the next camp (as they break into fluid groups that merge and split depending on conditions), and who shares food with whom. Despite the free-form structure of the society, there was still significant homophily on many dimensions, including age, height, weight, body fat, and strength, even after controlling for other traits. For instance, an increase of 7.5 kilograms in how similar people are in body weight triples the probability that they are connected to each other.

Again, homophily is not surprising: there are many pressures that push and pull similar people together, in this case on physical and age dimensions. But this indicates that homophily appears regardless of the society in question. Indeed, at the other end of the technological spectrum, even when people can choose from an enormous pool of people, they still exhibit strong homophily, and the trend is even increasing. 12

The Internet has led to an explosion of online dating and matchmaking. Fifteen percent of Americans report that they have used online dating sites, 13 and attitudes about the use of dating services have changed dramatically over time. The shift in attitudes toward and use of dating services by the young are especially striking, as more than a quarter of them have used an online dating site or app.

Such online sites provide for interesting dynamics in homophily. On the one hand people have many more choices and can reach out to people whom they would never meet in their day-to-day lives. These opportunities work to lower homophily. On the other hand, the technology allows people to filter and search, which allows them to be increasingly choosy as to which characteristics their potential dates and mates should have.

The filtering seems to win out, as we can see from more than 100,000 people’s behavior on a German online dating site. 14 People on the site fill out a detailed questionnaire and then can also add their own profile, with pictures and text. People can then browse through the listings and send a message to anyone they would like to meet. Upon receiving a message, a person can decide whether to answer it. Men, on average, browse 138 profiles, send 12 first contact messages, and get 4 replies. Women browse 73 profiles, send 6 messages, and receive 4 replies. So, men have a third of their contacts reciprocated, while women have two thirds reciprocated.

We can see homophily in action by examining to whom people send contact requests, and which ones they answer, based on demographics. For example, when women send first contact messages out, they are 35 percent more likely than average to send it to a man who is of a similar educational standing, and 41 percent less likely than average to send it to a man who has a lower educational standing. Men are less picky — they are 15 percent more likely than average to seek out a woman of a similar educational standing, and 6 percent less likely than average to seek out a woman of lower educational standing. There are similar biases in the reciprocation rates, and the biases are statistically significant after controlling for other personal attributes such as age, height, and appearance. 15

Looking at almost a million online daters in the U.S. shows that homophily is even stronger based on race, with both gay and straight users sending most of their messages to their own race, even when controlling for many other factors including education. 16

When one group is much bigger than another, homophily’s effects can be further amplified. As Chris Rock once joked,「All my black friends have a bunch of white friends. And all my white friends have one black friend.」

Actually, even though this was a joke, it really is just simple accounting. Consider a group of nine whites and one black, and suppose that they are all friends with each other. Then each white has one black friend and the black has nine white friends. That’s not too far from the relative ratios of the populations in the U.S., and so simple accounting will tell you that blacks are going to end up with more white friends on average than whites with blacks. That’s true of any minority and majority group. Now add homophily to this necessary asymmetry and it can become very rare for a member of the majority group to have friendships with the minority group.

Guess how many black friends the typical white person in the U.S. has — where a friend is someone with whom that person「regularly discussed important matters」? Zero . Yes, at least according to one survey of over two thousand adults, three quarters of whites have nobody of any other race who is considered to be a close friend. 17 With such divisions, we can begin to understand why one group can be almost completely ignorant of another group’s experiences, beliefs, and culture.

Homophily should not surprise you because, even if you have never heard of the word or any statistics about it, you would have had to have lived your life in isolation to have avoided it. However, the extent of homophily and its pervasiveness are striking and its stark divisions have many strong consequences for our exploration of the effects of human networks on our behaviors and outcomes.

Location, Location, Location

「We cannot marry Eskimos if there are none around.」

 —  PETER BLAU ,「 CONTRASTING THEORETICAL PERSPECTIVES 」

We connect disproportionately with others who resemble us for a variety of reasons, some involve our choices and others are due to things beyond our personal control.

Who better to offer advice than one who has experienced the same situation? New parents benefit from talking to other new parents about the plethora of choices they must make in raising their children. People studying to pass an exam to become a doctor or a lawyer or an actuary benefit from talking to other people who are studying for the same exam or have recently taken the exam. People in the same profession learn from others within their profession about new advances, techniques, and opportunities. Children gravitate toward others of the same age who have a similar level of maturity and common interests and concerns.

Beyond common interests, proximity has a huge influence on our friendships. Children in school spend most of their day with others who are within a year in age. Even if they wanted friendships across ages, their opportunities to have them are severely limited, as would be the benefits of being friends with someone they rarely see.

Natural divisions within businesses and other institutions, by expertise and tasks, also limit the contact that people have with others who have different training. Floor layouts in businesses are important in determining who speaks with whom on a regular basis. They are taken into account by architects who are planning anything from the design of courtyards in housing complexes to the workspace of a firm.

People also prefer to live in neighborhoods in which they find familiar businesses and culture. When people immigrate they actively choose areas in which others speak their language, celebrate their holidays, and practice their religion. Most immigrants are also heavily dependent upon friends and family in their new country to help them find places to live and work, and to navigate their new surroundings. Those connections are often to earlier waves of immigrants from a person’s hometown. When Europeans migrated to the U.S., they even chose places with climates similar to those of their origin, as well as places where their skill sets fit with local industries. Wheat farmers made their way to the Great Plains, and meatpackers made their way to the stockyards of Chicago and Omaha. Swedes moved to Illinois, Iowa, Wisconsin, Minnesota; Norwegians made their way to the Dakotas and Montana; Germans to Illinois, New York, Wisconsin, Pennsylvania; Poles went to Chicago; and so on. For many years, Chicago had the second largest Polish population in the world, trailing only Warsaw.

Social networks are such an important initial lifeline that they end up heavily reflecting immigrants’ heritage even a century later. The tightly knit communities based on ethnicity that formed during the heavy immigration periods in the late nineteenth century and early twentieth century still have an impact today. The density of a U.S. county’s Irish or Italian ancestry is still a surprisingly strong predictor of the number of friendship ties on Facebook between that county and Ireland or Italy today. A location that has an extra one percent of people with ancestry from some country has a third of a percent more Facebook friendships back to that country today. 18

Beyond co-location of immigrants by place of origin, people tend to live near others who are similar to themselves on other dimensions. For example, the co-location of a highly educated population is a not-so-secret secret of the success of Silicon Valley. Thirteen percent of the people living in Palo Alto hold a PhD, and that excludes Stanford’s campus (where many faculty live and which is actually not part of Palo Alto). Nearby towns of Mountain View and Cupertino also have large numbers of highly trained and skilled workers. To find towns with similar fractions of highly educated people one usually has to look for college towns — either rural ones that capture the entire faculty and many graduates like Davis, California, or suburbs like Brookline, Massachusetts, which sits close to MIT and Harvard. Part of the success of Silicon Valley comes from the flow of ideas that one cannot avoid overhearing in any local coffee shop. Expertise and experience also move with a labor force that wanders freely from one company to another. The flow of ideas, information, and innovation, as well as the culture, in Silicon Valley makes it an obvious place for anyone starting a tech business to locate. 19

Beyond information flows, there is an even stronger symbiosis that drives both the high-tech companies and highly skilled workers to locate in the same place. Chris Zaharias, the founder of a start-up named SearchQuant, worked for Netscape, Efficient Frontier, Omniture, Yahoo, and Triggit, before starting his own company. That sort of résumé is not unusual. Modern companies appear and disappear quickly, especially high-tech ones. If these companies were spread all over the world, then employees of these companies would have to move every few years. That would be costly for both the employees and ultimately the firms. By living in Silicon Valley you can work for a company that is about to disappear and can count on landing in a new company within a few miles of home even before the old one closes its doors. As both tech workers and companies flock to Silicon Valley, the concentration of people with similar backgrounds becomes an even stronger attractor and it becomes difficult for anyone serious about a high-tech career or business to locate anywhere else.

This is not unique to Silicon Valley: the same effect drives Hollywood’s long-standing grip on the movie business, as well as the high concentration of the financial industry in cities like New York, London, Tokyo, Singapore, and Shanghai. Thus, tendencies for co-location of people who work together and have similar skills is another force behind homophily. There are other aspects of geographic location that can amplify homophily.

Schelling’s Insight

Thomas Schelling won the 2005 Nobel Prize in economics for his fundamental contributions to game theoretic analyses of conflict and coordination. One of his many profound insights was to discover a strikingly simple and yet subtle force behind segregation.

The fact that cities are segregated by ethnicity and income is evident even to the casual observer. This is a form of homophily and many of the forces that shape it include the ones we discussed above.

What Schelling pointed out, however, was that even small biases in preferences over the ethnicity of one’s neighbors can have an enormous impact. Schelling’s model is remarkably robust. It has driven many follow-up variations and studies. 20

Schelling’s model works as follows. People come in varieties, say according to ethnicity or religion or caste, or some combination. To keep things simple, let’s look at an example in which people are either「solids」or「checkered.」I will refer to them as families, who live on a grid. Each family has up to eight neighbors occupying the squares immediately adjacent to them (on their sides, above or below them, or on the diagonals adjacent to them). Each family has some preferences over the ethnic composition of their neighbors. A family is happy as long as at least one third of their neighbors are of the same type as they are.

This is a very weak restriction on preferences: people simply prefer not to be too small a minority in their neighborhood. If people had stronger preferences, with everyone wanting to be surrounded by others who are of the same type, then it would not be surprising to get separation. Instead, in Schelling’s model, people only require that some minimal fraction of their neighbors be similar to them in order to be happy.

Let’s look at an example of what happens, starting with thirteen families randomly placed on a grid as pictured in Figure 5.5. The blank squares are unoccupied. Families are happy to stay in their current location as long as at least one third of their neighbors are of their type, but otherwise they wish to move.

Figure 5.5: Schelling’s model of segregation. We begin with an integrated city consisting of solid and checkered families, and a few unoccupied (blank) squares. A family is happy as long as they are not too small a minority in their immediate neighborhood. If fewer than one third of their neighbors are of the same type, they would like to move.

There are three unhappy families in Figure 5.5, each is marked with an X in Figure 5.6. For example, the checkered family near the bottom has three fourths of its neighbors solid and only one fourth checkered.

In Schelling’s model, an unhappy family moves to an unoccupied (blank) square at random. Let us do this one by one. There is nothing very strategic about it, families do not anticipate the future of the process, they just move to some open spot if they are unhappy. If you want, you can enrich the model so that unhappy families look to find a new location in which they would be happy, but the model works even without that enrichment. People keep moving around until all of them are happy. Once they are all happy, they stop and we can see what the resulting pattern looks like.

Figure 5.6: The three families with Xs are unhappy: each has fewer than one third of their neighbors of the same type. The other families start out happy.

Let’s give it a try. Figure 5.7 shows us a series of moves. In panel (a) of Figure 5.7 one of the unhappy families moves. In this case it is a solid family moving down and to the left, leaving its old location (where the x is) empty. The choice of which family moves first is random.

Note that as we move the solid family as in panel (a) of Figure 5.7, it changes which other families are unhappy. As families move they increase the presence of their type in their new neighborhood and decrease the presence of their type in the old neighborhood. That affects which others are happy and unhappy. You can see this effect by comparing the unhappy families from Figure 5.6 to panel (b) of Figure 5.7. The unhappy solid family at the very left of Figure 5.6 did not move but it gained a solid neighbor and so is now happy. A different solid family at the right of Figure 5.6 was originally happy, now becomes unhappy in Figure 5.7 panel (b) since it lost one of its solid neighbors.

Figure 5.7: Unhappy families move. The order is random, as are the spaces that they move to.

These externalities are an important component of the Schelling model. As families of a given type leave a neighborhood, that prompts others of their type who are left behind to become unhappy and move as well. It can also make people in the neighborhood that they move to who are of other types unhappy. This cascades quite dramatically.

After the moving is over, we are left with the configuration in panel (b) of Figure 5.8. We end up with strong separations between solids and checkers even though all families were happy to live in integrated neighborhoods; they just wanted to be sure that some minimal fraction of their neighbors was like them. The model works for many different levels of preference and for various forms of geographies.

The forces underlying Schelling’s model should be becoming familiar: it involves externalities and cascading behavior. People’s decisions to move affect their neighbors’ happiness. The feedback effect leads to cascading moves, and small initial biases in preferences get amplified via the interactions and have dramatic consequences. 21

Figure 5.8: Even though every family was willing to be a minority in their neighborhood, just not too small a minority, the resulting moves led to a very segregated community.

One study estimated the thresholds for「white flight」by examining how large a percentage of minority populations needs to move in in order for many whites to leave. They found evidence of thresholds of between 5 and 20 percent — so that whites exited even when small numbers of minorities moved in. 22 This suggests that those moving out actually had preferences to be in a large majority, which would be a much more extreme situation than our Schelling example. This might also reflect effects similar to those that we saw in the Keynesian Beauty Contest: people might move in anticipation of others leaving the neighborhood, adding another layer to Schelling’s insight.

Of course, a simple model like Schelling’s is bound to miss some aspects of reality. Some neighborhoods are highly racially mixed and stay mixed, while other neighborhoods are more reactive and shift with even small increases of minority populations. 23 Not everyone has the same preferences: some prefer to live in very homogeneous neighborhoods and small changes in their neighborhoods lead to dramatic moves, while others are happy to live, or even prefer to live, in very heterogeneous neighborhoods.

Still, Schelling’s model provides important lessons. It makes clear that even relatively minor preference biases can have a large impact given the cascades that can result from the externalities involved in people’s decisions of how to situate themselves — and you can see that this applies not only to neighborhoods, but also to clubs and networks. This helps explain the strength of homophily that we see across many dimensions. There are many forces that push to homophily, and the phenomenon that Schelling points out can amplify any and all of them.

More Reasons for Homophily

「The most exciting attractions are between two opposites that never meet.」

 —  ANDY WARHOL

You might expect that the forces we have already discussed would cover most of the drivers of homophily, but it is so pervasive because of the multitude of forces conspiring to push us toward our brethren. 24

Community boundaries are important in allowing us to cooperate and trust each other in our everyday lives. Repeated interactions allow us to reciprocate when people help us out and to punish detrimental behaviors. We can trust our neighbors to look out for our children and other prized possessions, as we can do the same for them. We even teach our children to beware of strangers.

As human populations become increasingly urbanized, defining those communities becomes increasingly challenging. We build networks around our professions, ethnicities, religions, and other common features that put us into more frequent and well-defined contact with each other. Instead of local geography defining our communities, we rely more directly on homophily and repeated contact to define our trusted circles of friends.

Homophily also reinforces itself. People can better predict the behaviors and reactions of those close to them. 25 They better understand the local culture and norms, and how they are expected to act in various circumstances. Although it lowers stress and helps people coordinate in their day-to-day lives, 26 it also ends up increasing differences across groups and making it relatively easier and safer to interact in one’s own spheres.

Our understanding of homophily would also be incomplete if we failed to account for competition between groups. People reaching across groups can be seen as traitors or with suspicion. Who can forget Romeo and Juliet, and the many other feuds and gang wars that have plagued societies throughout history. Competing groups often exhibit strong rivalries, from the clan divisions in ancient China to the schism between Sunni and Shia in the Islamic world. It is hard to find a part of the globe with substantial ethnic or religious heterogeneity that does not have rivalries.

As animosity and suspicion between groups grows, so does homophily. Prior to 2004, segregation in Spain between native Spaniards and Arab immigrants had been declining. The morning of March 11, 2004, abruptly reversed that trend. Ten bombs exploded on four different trains in the middle of rush hour, killing hundreds and wounding thousands of people. The investigation was complicated and followed many false leads, but eventually led to the conviction of more than twenty people. The Islamic militancy of the core cell of terrorists behind the bombing led to heightened tensions between natives and Arab immigrants. It has been estimated that segregation between the Arab and Spanish population increased by more than 5 percent in the following two years — a large amount considering how infrequently people move. 27 This is certainly not unique to Spain, and the impact of any single event can eventually dissipate. Still, it shows how important and salient perceptions of group identities can be.

Understanding how easily people assume roles and identities provides further insight into chasms between groups based on identities, another driver of homophily. Even though by now it has become almost a cliché, the famous Stanford Prison Experiment provides a frightening example of how simply having people assume identities can lead to divisions and even conflict between groups. A Web site dedicated to its description begins with the following introduction: 28 「On a quiet Sunday morning in August, a Palo Alto, California, police car swept through the town picking up college students as part of a mass arrest for violation of Penal Codes 211, Armed Robbery, and Burglary, a 459 PC. The suspect was picked up at his home, charged, warned of his legal rights, spread-eagled against the police car, searched, and handcuffed often as surprised and curious neighbors looked on. The suspect was then put in the rear of the police car and carried off to the police station, the sirens wailing.」

This experiment was headed by Philip Zimbardo, Craig Haney, and Curtis Banks in 1973. The subjects of the experiment were twenty-one healthy college-aged males who were arbitrarily split into two groups: guards and prisoners. The prisoners had not really committed armed robbery or burglary and the guards had no prior roles in law enforcement. A makeshift prison was built in the basement of a Stanford building with the advice of former prison inmates. After being「arrested」in this dramatic fashion to help them assume the role of prisoners, the subjects who were picked to be prisoners were searched, stripped, and sprayed to delouse. They were given prison clothing and assigned to small cells without clocks or windows. The guards were not given any particular guidelines, instead, as described on the Web site,「they were free, within limits, to do whatever they thought was necessary to maintain law and order in the prison and to command the respect of the prisoners.」29

What ensued was far beyond what the designers of the experiment had anticipated. The subjects became so ingrained in their identities and roles that the experiment took a dangerous turn. By the second day the prisoners began to rebel, yelling at the guards about their treatment. The guards responded by spraying the prisoners with fire extinguishers, removing beds from the cells, and putting the leaders of the rebellion in solitary confinement. On that second day of the experiment, one of the prisoners, designated #8612, broke down with hysterical ranting and crying. The guards thought he was acting and refused to release him, instead offering him improved treatment if he would act as an informant. When his situation worsened, it became clear that he was not acting and the subject was released from the experiment. By the fifth day of the experiment it had to be ended. Some guards were seen to be「acting sadistically」and others were not able to control them, and the prisoners were seen to be「withdrawing and acting in pathological ways.」

Some of Homophily’s Implications

Alberto Alesina and Ekaterina Zhuravskaya 30 examined how segregated countries are along ethnic, linguistic, and religious dimensions and how this relates to the success of the country according to various measures. They work with a「segregation index」that is a variation on a homophily index — comparing how concentrated populations are within various regions in a country compared to what things would look like if people were distributed across regions in proportion to their presence in the population. So, for instance, in South Africa, roughly 80 percent of the population are black African, 9 percent are locally referred to as coloured (a variety of mixed ethnic origins), 9 percent are white, and the remaining are of Asian origin. If there was no segregation, then each region would have roughly this same mix of population. On the other hand, for example, if some regions are almost all black, and other regions are all coloured, and others all white and Asian, then there is substantial segregation. So, a score of 0 on the segregation index means that different ethnic groups are smoothed evenly across all regions. A score of 1 means that different ethnicities live in entirely different regions.

The five most segregated countries are Zimbabwe, Guatemala, Afghanistan, Uganda, and Turkey, all scoring .36 or above. The least ethnically segregated countries are Germany, Sweden, the Netherlands, Cambodia, and South Korea, all scoring less than .01. China, India, Russia, Israel, and Spain are in the .08 to .24 range — and the U.S. and U.K. are in the .01 to .03 range. That might surprise you, but these are fairly large regions and the segregation within many U.S. and U.K. cities is at a neighborhood level. This measure of segregation is capturing whether different ethnicities live in entirely different regions of a country rather than whether there is homophily at a local and network level. For example, Arabs and Jews tend to live in different cities in Israel, with some exceptions, and so it has a high segregation score. In contrast, Asians, blacks, whites, and Hispanics often live in many of the same cities in the U.S., but in different neighborhoods. So Israel shows up as being much more segregated than the U.S.

Regardless of why a country might have a low or high level of segregation, we can still see whether this crude measure of segregation predicts how well a country functions. Just from the names of the countries and the levels of segregation, you can guess where this is going. The most segregated countries are the poorest and have the worst-functioning governments; and the least segregated countries are the wealthiest and have the best-functioning governments.

Using the Alesina and Zhuravskaya data, I have plotted out how a few basic variables correlate with a country’s segregation index. To keep the figures uncluttered, I have only included countries with a minimal GDP. Ghana just makes my cut of minimal GDP and Côte d’Ivoire falls just short. The figure with all countries actually has an even steeper relationship, but more labels become unreadable. 31

In Figure 5.9 we see how a country’s overall productivity, in terms of GDP per capita, relates to the country’s segregation. The basic trend is that higher segregation leads to lower productivity. The average GDP of the least segregated countries is more than six times as high as the average GDP of the most segregated countries. The relationship represented by the best-fit line through the data is negative and highly significant in a statistical sense (at more than the 99.9 percent level).

Figure 5.9: Countries’ GDP as a function of how segregated they are.

There are other things to note about the relationship in Figure 5.9. It is still very noisy: there is lots of variation between countries. For instance, countries that have very low segregation have a wide variety of GDP levels. Having low segregation is no guarantee of having high GDP: there are societies with very low segregation that do very poorly. What is important to note, however, is that at the highest levels of segregation — above .25 — there are no countries with high GDP. Having very high levels of segregation seems incompatible with high GDP: there are no countries in the upper right part of the figure (that are highly segregated and have a productive economy). Low segregation does not guarantee prosperity, but high segregation seems to preclude it.

Why might greater segregation lead to less functional governments and economies? 32 Alesina and Zhuravskaya offer an explanation: greater segregation provokes lower trust between people in the country, and makes for the proliferation of special-interest political parties, which can then lead to more divisive politics and less effective governments.

We will soon visit a variety of other impacts of homophily, including differences in beliefs, norms, and opportunities across groups.

Homophily as the Fabric of Our Lives

As we move forward it will help to keep in mind the multitude of forces that push humans toward others with similar characteristics: biases in patterns of location and contact, shared challenges and goals, ease of communication, predictability and understanding of behavior and norms, real or perceived intergroup competition and resulting prejudice and racism, as well as our basic socio-psychological tendencies to identify with groups. Cascades in behaviors, such as the one recognized by Schelling in people choosing where to live, amplify the divides among groups; and feedback from diverging norms and behaviors reinforces and deepens our schisms.

Homophily is so fundamental to human networks and we are so familiar with it that it fades into the background. We lose sight of it not only in our day-to-day lives, but also when we look for explanations for our culture, norms, and behaviors. While homophily makes our lives and the behavior of those around us predictable, 33 it is also very divisive. The splits in our social structures are so deep, pervasive, and resilient that they play primary rather than secondary roles in understanding polarization in beliefs and opinions as well as persistent inequality in opportunity, employment, and well-being, as we shall see in the chapters that follow. Forgetting about these basic network divides can lead one to propose ineffective policies when one tries to fix such problems.

6 • IMMOBILITY AND INEQUALITY: NETWORK FEEDBACK AND POVERTY TRAPS

