## 参考文献

### 01

注：MOT1 和 MOT2 是 Simon，1979 a 和 1989（《思维的多种模型》（Modela of Thought））卷 1 和卷 2 的缩写；MOD 是 Simon，1977（《发现的模型》（Models of Discovery））一书标题缩写；MOBR1 和 MOBR2 是指 Simon，1982a 撰写的《有限理性的多种模型》（Models of Bounded Rationality）卷 1 和卷 2 的缩写。

ABELSON, R. 1963.Computer simulation of「hot」cognition.In Computer simulation of personality.Ed.S.S.Tompkins and S.Messick.New York：Wiley.

ACH, N. 1905.Uber die Willenstatigkeit unddas Denken.Gottengen：Vandenhoeck und Ruprecht.

ADAMS, H. 1936.Mont St.Michel and Chartres.Boston：Houghton-Miffin.

ANGELL, N. 1913.The great illusion，4th ed.New York：Putnam's.

ASHBY, W. R.1952.Design for a brain.New York：Wiley.

AUBERT, K. E.1982.Accurate predictions and fixed point theorems.Social Science Information 21：323-348，612-622.

BAARS, B. J.1986.The cognitive revolution in psychology.New York：Guilford Press.

BACKUS, J. W.1959.Automatic programming：Properties and performance of FORTRAN systems I and II.In Proceedings of the Symposium on the Mechanisation of Thought Processes.Ed.D.V.Blake and A.M.Uttley.National Physical Laboratory，Teddington, U. K.London：H.M.Stationery Offce.

BARNARD, C. 1.1938.The functions of the executive.Cambridge：Harvard University Press.

BARTLETT, F. C.1932.Remembering.Cambridge：Cambridge University Press.

BAYLOR, G. W.，JR.，and H.A.SIMON.1966.A chess mating combinations program.AFIPS Conference Proceedings, Spring Joint Computer Conference 28：431-447.

BERKELEY, E. 1949.Giant brains, or Machines that think.New York：Wiley.

BERLYNE, D. 1965.Structure and direction in thinking.New York：Wiley.

BOBROW, D. G.1968.Natural language input for a computer problem-solving system.In Semantic information processing（chap.3）.Ed.M.Minsky.Cambridge：M.I.T.Press.

BORGES, J. 1956.Ficciones.Buenos Aires：Emece Editions.

BORING, E. 1933.The physical dimensions of consciousness.Watkins Glen, NY：Century.1946.Mind and mechanism.American journal of Psychology 59：173-192.

BOWDEN, B. V.，ed.1953.Faster than thought.London：Pitman&Sons.

BROADBENT, D. E.1954.A mechanical model for human attention and immediate memory.Psychological Review 64：205.

BRUNER, J. S.，J.J.GOODNOW, and G.A.AUSTIN.1956.A study of thinking.New York：Wiley.

BYRD, R. 1938.Alone.New York：Putnam's.

CARLSON, E. A.1981.Genes, radiation, and society：Life and work of H.J.Muller.

Ithaca, NY：Cornell University Press.

CARNAP, R. 1937.The logical syntax of language.London：Routledge&c Kegan Paul.

1942.Introduction to semantics.Cambridge：Harvard University Press.

CARPENTER, P.，and M. JUST.1987.The role of working memory in comprehension.In Klahr and Kotovsky, eds.（chap.2）.

CERVANTES, M. 1940.Don Quijote de la Mancha.Madrid：Espasa-Calpe.

CHAMPERNOWNE, D. G.1953.A model of income distribution.Economic Journal 63：318-351.

CHARNES, A.，W. W.COOPER, and B.MELLON.1952.Blending aviation gasolines：A study in programming interdependent activities in an integrated oil company.

Econometrica 20：135-159.

CHARNESS, N. 1987.Expertise in chess and bridge.In Klahr and Kotovsky, eds.（chap.7）

CHASE, W. G.，and H.A.SIMON.1973a.Perception in chess.Cognitive Psychology 4：55-81.（Reprinted in MOT1，chap.6.4.）

CHASE, W. G.，and H.A.SIMON.1973b.The mind's eye in chess.In Visual information processing.Ed.W.G.Chase.New York：Academic Press.（Reprinted in MOT1，chap.6.5.）

CHAUDURI, N. C.1951.The autobiography of an unknown Indian.New York：Macmillan.

CHOMSKY, A. N.1955.The logical structure of linguistic theory.Cambridge, MA：mimeographed, M.I.T.Library.1956.Three models for the description of language.IRE Transactions on Information Theory IT-2（3）：113-24.

CLARKSON, G. P.E.1961.A simulation of trust investment.Englewood Cliffs, NJ：Prentice-Hall.

COLES, S. 1969.Syntax directed interpretation of natural language.Ph.D.diss.

Carnegie Mellon University. Abridged version in Simon and Siklossy, eds.，1972.

COMMONS, J. R.1934.Institutional economics.Madison：University of Wisconsin Press.

COOKE, A. 1977.Six men.New York：Alfred A.Knopf.

CRECINE, J. P.1969.Governmental problem-solving：A computer simulation of municipal budgeting.Chicago：Rand-McNally.

CYERT, R. M.，and J.G.MARCH.1963.The behavioral theory of the firm.Englewood Cliffs, NJ：Prentice-Hall.

DINNEEN, G. P.1955.Programming pattern recognition.Proceedings of the 1955 Western Joint Computer Conference 7：94-100.

DOHERTY, R. E.1948.Education for professional responsibility.Journal of Engineering Education 39：76-80.

DREYFUS, H. L.1972.What computers can't do.New York：Harper&Row.

DUNCKER, K. 1945.On problem solving.Psychological Monographs 58：5.

ELY, R. T.1930.Outlines of economics.5th ed.New York：Macmillan.

ERICSSON, A.，and J. STASZEWSKI.1987.Skilled memory and expertise：Mechanisms of exceptional performance.In Klahr and Kotovsky, eds.（chap.9）

FEIGENBAUM, E. A.，and H.A.SIMON.1984.EPAM-like models of recognition and learning.Cognitive Science 8：305-336.（Reprinted in MOT2，chap.3.4.）

FITZ GERALD, E. 1909.Omar Khayyam.London：A.6c C.Black.

FRIEDRICH, CARL J. 1941.Constitutional government and democracy.Boston：Little, Brown.

GEORGE, H. 1882.Progress and poverty.Garden City, NY：Doubleday.

GIBSON, E. J.1940.A systematic application of the concepts of generalization and differentiation to verbal learning.Psychological Review 47：196-229.

GODEL, K. 1931.Uber formal unentscheidbare Satze der Principia Mathematica und verwandter Systeme.Monatshefte fur Mathematik und Physik 38：173-198.

GODWIN, G. L.1958.Digital computers tap out designs for large motors.fast.Power（April 1958）.

GOODWIN, R. M.1947.Dynamical coupling with especial reference to markets having production lags.Econometrica 15：181-204.

GORDON, R. A.，and J.E.HOWELL.1959.Higher education for business.New York：Columbia University Press.

GOSNELL, HAROLD F. 1927.Getting out the vote.Chicago：University of Chicago Press.

GREEN, B. F.，JR.，A.K.WOLF, C.CHOMSKY, and K.LAUGHERY.1961.Baseball：An automatic question answerer.Proceedings of the Western Joint Computer Conference 19：219-224.

GREGG, L. W.，and H.A.SIMON.1967.Process models and stochastic theories of simple concept formation.Journal of Mathematical Psychology 4：246-276.（Reprinted in MOT1，chap.5.4.）

DE GROOT, A. 1946.Het Denken van den Schaker.Amsterdam：N.H.Utig.Mij.

GULICK, L. and L.URWICK, eds.1937.Papers on the science of administration.New York：Institute of Public Administration, Columbia University.

HADAMARD, J. 1945.The psychology of invention in the mathematical feld.Princeton, NJ：Princeton University Press.

HARRIS, Z. S.1951.Methods in structural linguistics.Chicago：University of Chicago Press.

HAYES, J. R.1989.The complete problem solver 2nd ed.Hillsdale, NJ：Erlbaum.，and H.A.Simon.1974.Understanding written problem instructions.In Knowledge and cognition.Ed.L.W.Gregg.Hillsdale, NJ：rlbaum.（Reprinted in MOT1，chap.7.1.）.1977.Psychological differences among problem isomorphs.In Cognitive theory.Vol.2.Ed.N.J.Castellan, D.B.Pisoni, and G.R.Potts.Hillsdale, NJ：Erlbaum.Reprinted in MOT1，chap.7.3.）

HAZARD, L. 1982.Attorney for the situation.Pittsburgh：Carnegie Mellon University Press.

HEBB, D. O.1949.The organization of behavior.New York：Wiley.

HERD AN, G. 1961.A critical examination of Simon's model of certain distribution functions in linguistics.Applied Statistics 10：65-72.

HOLT, C. C, F.MODIGLIANI, J.F.MUTH, and H.A.SIMON.1960.Planning production, inventories, and work force.Englewood Cliffs, NJ：Prentice-Hall.

HOVLAND, C. I.1952.A「communication analysis」of concept learning.Psychological Review 59：461-472.

HUDSON, W. H.1904.Green mansions.Mt.Vernon, NY：Peter Pauper Press.1918.Far away and long ago.New York：Dutton.

HULL, C. L.1920.Quantitative aspects of the evolution of concepts.Psychological Monographs 28.

HUMPHREY, G. 1951.Thinking.New York：Wiley.

HUNT, E. B.1962.Concept formation.New York：Wiley.

IJIRI, Y.，and H. A.SIMON.1977.Skew distributions and the sizes of business frms.Amsterdam：North Holland.

JAMES, WILLIAM. 1890.The principles of psychology.New York：Holt.

JOHNSON-LAIRD, P. N.1983.Mental models.Cambridge：Harvard University Press.

KARL, BARRY D. 1974.Charles E.Merriam and the study of politics.Chicago：University of Chicago Press.

KATONA, G. 1940.Organizing and memorizing.New York：Columbia University Press.

KEYNES, J. M.1936.The general theory of employment, interest, and money.New York：Harcourt Brace.

KLAHR, D.，and K. DUNBAR.1987.Developmental differences in scientifc discovery strategies.In Klahr and Kotovsky（chap.4）.

KLAHR, D. and K KOTOVSKY，1987.Complex information processing.Hillsdale, NJ.：Erlbaum.

KNUTH, D. 1968.The art of computer programming.Vol.1：Fundamental algorithms.Reading, MA：Addison-Wesley.

KOBLITZ, N. 1988.A tale of three equations：Or the emperors have no clothes.The Mathematical Intelligencer 10（1）：4-10，14-16；10（2）：11-12.

KOESTLER, A. 1941.Darkness at noon.New York：Macmillan.

KOROLYUK, V. S.，L.I.POLISCHUK, and A.S.TOMUSYAK.1969.A limit theorem for semi-markow processes.[In Russian.]Kibernetika 5：144-45.

KOSSLYN, S. M.1980.Image and mind.Cambridge：Harvard University Press.

KOTOVSKY, K.，and D. FALLSIDE.1987.Representation and transfer in problem solving.In Klahr and Kotovsky, eds.（chap.3）.

KOTOVSKY, K.，J. R.HAYES, and H.A.SIMON.1985.Why are some problems hard?Cognitive Psychology 17：248-294.（Reprinted in MOT2，chap.4.8.）

KOTOVSKY, K.，and H. A.SIMON.1973.Empirical tests of a theory of human acquisition of concepts for sequential patterns.Cognitive Psychology 4：399-424.（Reprinted in MOT1，chap.5.2.）

KULKARNI, D.，and H. A.SIMON.1988.The processes of scientifc discovery：The strategy of experimentation.Cognitive Science 12：139-176.（Reprinted in MOT2，chap.5.3.）

LANGLEY, P. W.，H.A.SIMON, G.BRADSHAW, and J.ZYTKOW.1987.Scientifc discovery：Computational explorations of the creative processes.Cambridge, MA：M.I.T.Press.

LARKIN, J. H.1987.Display-based problem solving.In Klahr and Kotovsky, eds.（chap.12）

LARKIN, J. H.，J.MCDERMOTT, D.P.SIMON and H.A.SIMON.1980.Expert and novice performance in solving physics problems.Science 208：1335-1342.（Reprinted in MOT2，chap.4.5）

LARKIN, J. H.，and H.A.SIMON.1987.Why a diagram is（sometimes）worth 10，000 words.Cognitive Science 11：65-100.（Reprinted in MOT2，chap.6.3.）

LOCKE, W. N.，and A.D.BOOTH, eds.1955.Machine translation of languages.New York：Wiley.

LORAN, E. 1943.Cezanne's composition.Berkley, CA：University of California Press.

LOTKA, A. J.1924.Elements of physical biology.Baltimore, MD：Williams and Wilkins.

MCCORDUCK, P. 1979.Machines who think.San Francisco：W.H.Freeman.

MACHLUP, F. 1946.Marginal analysis and empirical research.American Economic Review 36：519-554.

MANDELBROT, B. 1953.An informational theory of the statistical structure of language.In Communication Theory.Ed.Willis Jackson（pp.486-502）.London：Butterworths.1959.A note on a class of skew distribution functions：Analysis and critique of a paper by H.Simon.Information and Control 2：90-99.1961a.Final note on a class of skew distribution functions.Information and Control 4：198-216.1961b.Post scriptum to Professor Simon's「reply.」Information and Control 4：300-304.

MARCH, J. G.，and H.A.SIMON.1958.Organizations.New York：Wiley.

MARX, K. 1909.Capital.3 vols.Chicago：Charles H.Kerr.

MASON, E. S.1952.Comment.In A survey ofcontemporary economics：II.Ed.Bernard F.Haley.Homewood, IL：Irwin.

MEADOWS, D. H.1972.The limits to growth.New York：Universe Books.

MERRIAM, CHARLES E. 1906.Report of an investigation of the municipal revenues of Chicago.Chicago：City Club of Chicago.1921.The present state of the study of politics.American Political Science Review 15：173-185.1934.Political power.New York：McGraw-Hill..1936.The role of politics in social change.New York：New York University Press.1942.The education of Charles E.Merriam.In The future of government in the United States（chap.1）.Ed.Leonard D.White.Chicago：University of Chicago Press.

1945.Systematic politics.Chicago：University of Chicago Press.，and HAROLD F.GOSNELL.1924.Non-voting.Chicago：University of Chicago Press.

MILLER, G. A.1956.The magical number seven, plus or minus two.Psychological Review 63：81-97 and F.C.FRICK.1949.Statistical behavioristics and sequences of responses.Psychological Review 56：311-329.

E. GALANTER, and K.H.PRIBRAM.1960.Plans and the structure of behavior.New York：Holt, inehart 8c Winston.，and P.N.JOHNSON-LAIRD.1976.Language and perception.Cambridge-Harvard University Press.

MINSKY, M. 1956.Heuristic aspects of the artificial intelligence problem.Group Report 34-55，ASTIA Document AD 236885.Lincoln Laboratories, M.I.T.，Lexington, MA.December 17，1956.[Revised versions of this paper have been published in several places under the title"Steps toward artifcial intelligence."See, for example, Proceedings of the Institute of Radio Engineers 49（1961）：8-30.]，ed.1968.Semantic information processing.Cambridge, MA：M.I.T.Press.

MONTAGUE, R. 1960.journal of Symbolic Logic 25：355-356.

MOORE, O. K.，and S.B.ANDERSON.1954a.Modern logic and tasks for experiments on problem solving behavior, journal of Psychology 38：151-160.

.1954b. Search behavior in individual and group problem solving.American Sociological Review 19：702-714.

MORE, T.，JR. 1957.Deductive logic for automata.Master's thesis, Massachusetts Institute of Technology.

MORRISON, H. C.1931.The practice of teaching in the secondary school.Rev.ed.Chicago：University of Chicago Press.

MUMFORD, L. 1938.The Culture of Cities.New York：Harcourt, Brace.

MURASAKI, S. 1960.The tale ofGenji.Trans.A.Waley.New York：Modern Library.

MUTH, JOHN. 1961.Rational expectations and the theory of price movements.Econometrica 29：315-335.

NEEDHAM, J. G.，and J.T.LLOYD.1916.Life of inland waters.Ithaca, NY：Cornstock.

NEISSER, U. 1963.The imitation of man by machine.Science 139：193-197.

VON NEUMANN, J. 1951.The general and logical theory of automata.In Cerebral mechanisms in behavior.Ed.L.A.Jefress.New York：Wiley.1958.The computer and the brain.New Haven, CT：Yale University Press.，and O.MORGENSTERN.1944.The theory of games and economic behavior.

Princeton, NJ：Princeton University Press.

NEWELL, A. 1955.The chess machine：An example of dealing with a complex task by adaptation.Proceedings of the Western Joint Computer Conference 7：101-8.1973.You can't play 20 questions with Nature and win.In Visual information processing.Ed.William G.Chase.New York：Academic Press.，J.C.SHAW, and H.A.SIMON.1957.Empirical explorations of the logic theory machine.Proceedings of the Western Joint Computer Conference 11：218-239.

.1958a. Elements of a theory of human problem solving.Psychological Review 65：151-166.（Reprinted in MOT2，chap.1.1.）.1958b.Chess-playing programs and the problem of complexity.IBM Journal of Research and Development 2：320-335.1962.The processes of creative thinking.In Contemporary approaches to creative thinking.Ed.H.E.Gruber, G.Terrell, and M.Wertheimer（pp.63-119）.

New York：Atherton Press.（Reprinted in MOT1，chap. 4.1.）

NEWELL, A. and H.A.SIMON.1956.The logic theory machine.IRE Transactions on Information Theory IT-2.3：61-79.1972.Human problem solving.Englewood Cliffs, NJ：Prentice-Hall..1976.Computer science as empirical inquiry：Symbols and search.Communications of the Association for Computing Machinery 19：113-126.

NOVAK, G. S.，JR.1976.Computer understanding of physics problems stated in natural language.Technical Report NL-30.Austin：Department of Computer Sciences, University of Texas.

PEIRCE, B. 0.1929.A short table of integrals.3rd rev.ed.Boston：Ginn 6c Company.

PIERSON, F. C, et al.1959.The education of American businessmen.New York：McGraw-Hill.

PITTS, W.，and W. S.MCCULLOCH.1943.A logical calculus of the ideas immanent in nervous activity.Bulletin of Mathematical Biophysics 5：115-137.

POLYA, G. 1945.How to solve it.Princeton, NJ.：Princeton University Press.

POPLE, H. 1969.A goal-oriented language for the computer.Ph.D.diss.，Carnegie Mellon University.（Reprinted in Simon and Siklossy, eds.，1972.）

POST, E. L.1941.Formal reductions of the general combinatorial decision problem.American Journal of Mathematics 65：197-268.

PRESCOTT, E. C, ed.1978.Papers in honor of Herbert A.Simon.The Bell Journal of Economics 9：491-608.President's Committee on Social Trends.1933.Recent social trends in the United States.New York：McGraw-Hill.

PROUST, M. 1954.A la recherche du temps perdu.Paris：Gallimard.

PYLYSHYN, Z. W.1973.What the mind's eye tells the mind's brain.Psychological Bulletin 80：1-24.

QUILLIAN, R. 1966.Semantic memory.Ph.D.diss.，Carnegie Institute of Technology.Reprinted in Minsky, ed.，1968.

RIDLEY, C. E.and H.A.SIMON.1938.Measuring Municipal Activities.Chicago：International City Managers'Association.

ROETHLISBERGER, F. J.，and W.J.DICKSON.1939.Management and the worker.Cambridge：Harvard University Press.

ROLVAAG, O. 1929.Giants in the earth.New York：Harper.

ROSENBLUTH, A.，N. WIENER, and J.BIGELOW.1943.Behavior, purpose and teleology.Philosophy of Science 10：18-24.

ROYCE, J. 1899.The world and the individual, vol.1.New York：Dover.

RUSSELL, B. 1903.Introduction to mathematical philosophy.London：G.Allen 6c Unwin..1940.An inquiry into meaning and truth.London：G.Allen&c Unwin.

SAMUELSON, P. A.1941.The stability of equilibrium：Comparative statics and dynamics.Econometrica 9：97-120.

SCHLESINGER, H. 1.1931.General chemistry.Rev.ed.New York：Longmans, Green.

SCHULTZ, H. 1938.The theory and measurement of demand.Chicago：University of Chicago Press.

SCHURR, S. H.，and J.MARSCHAK.1950.Economic aspects of atomic power.Princeton, NJ：Princeton University Press.

SELFRIDGE, O. F.1955.Pattern recognition and modern computers.Proceedings of the 1955 Joint Computer Conference 7：91-93.

SELIGMAN, E. R.A.，ed.1935.Encyclopedia of the social sciences.New York：Macmillan.

SELZ, O. 1924.Die Gezetze der produktiven und reproduktiven Geistestatigkeit.Bonn：Cohen.

SHANNON, C. E.1938.A symbolic analysis of relay and switching circuits.Transactions of the American Institute of Electrical Engineers 57：1-11.

SHEPARD, R. N.1963.Comments on Professor Underwood's paper.In Verbal behavior and learning.Ed.C.N.Cofer and B.S.Musgrave（pp.48-70）.New York：McGraw-Hill.

SHILS, E. 1948.The present state of American sociology.Glencoe, IL：The Free Press.

SiKL6ssy, L. 1968.Natural language learning by computer.Ph.D.diss.，Carnegie Mellon University.Abridged version in Simon and Siklossy, eds.1972.

SIMON, D. P.，and H.A.SIMON.1978.Individual differences in solving physics problems.In Children's thinking：What develops?Ed.R.S.Siegler.Hillsdale, NJ：Erlbaum.（Reprinted in MOT2，chap.4.3.）

SIMON, H. A.1935.Administration of public recreational facilities in Milwaukee.Unpublished manuscript.Quoted in Simon 1947a.（pp.211-112）.，ed.1940，1946，1947.The technique of municipal administration.Chicago：International City Managers'Association.1943a.Fiscal aspects of metropolitan consolidation.Berkeley：Bureau of Public Administration, University of California.（Two chapters reprinted in MOBR1，chap.1.3.）.1943b.The incidence of a tax on urban real property.Quarterly Journal of Economics 57：398-420.（Reprinted in MOBR1，chap.1.4.）.1944.Decision making and administrative organization.Public Administration Review 4：16-31.1945.Review of The theory of games and economic behavior, by J.von Neumann and O.Morgenstern.American Journal of Sociology 27：558-560.1946.The proverbs of administration.Public Administration Review 6：53-67..1947a，1957，1976.Administrative behavior.New York：Macmillan..1947b.The axioms of Newtonian mechanics.Philosophical Magazine 30：888-905.（Reprinted in MOD, chap.6.1.）.1947c.Effects of increased productivity upon the ratio of urban to rural population.Econometrica 15：31-42.（Reprinted in MOBR1，chap.3.1.）.1950.Modern organization theories.Advanced Management 15：2-4.1952.On the definition of the causal relation.The Journal of Philosophy 49：517-528.（Reprinted in MOD, chap.2.2.）.1953.Causal ordering and identifiability.In Studies in econometric methods.Ed.W.C.Hood and T.C.Koopmans.New York：Wiley.（Reprinted in MOD, chap.2.1.）.1955a.A behavioral model of rational choice.Quarterly Journal of Economics 69：99-118.（Reprinted in MOT1，chap.1.1.）.1955b.On a class of skew distribution functions.Biometrika 52：425-440.1956.Rational choice and the structure of the environment.Psychological Review 63：129-138.（Reprinted in MOT2，chap.1.2.）.1957a.Models of man.New York：Wiley.1957b.Background of decision making.Naval War College Review 12：1-23.1960a.Some further notes on a class of skew distribution functions.Information and Control 3：80-88.1960b，1965，1969.The new science of management decision.New York：Harper&Row（1st and 2nd eds.）；Englewood Cliffs, NJ：Prentice-Hall（3rd ed.）..1961a.Reply to「final note」by Benoit Mandelbrot.Information and Control 4：217-23..1961b.Reply to Dr.Mandelbrot's post scriptum.Information and Control 4：305-8..1967a.The business school：A problem in organization design.Journal of Management Studies 4：1-16.1967b.Motivational and emotional controls of cognition.Psychological Review 74：29-39.（Reprinted in MOT1，chap.1.3.）.1969The sciences of the artifcial.Cambridge, MA：M.I.T.Press.（2nd ed.，1981.）—1973.Mao's China in 1972.Items 27（1）：1-4.1976.From substantive to procedural rationality.In Method and appraisal.in economics.Ed.S.J.Latsis（pp.129-148）.Cambridge：Cambridge University Press.（Reprinted in MOBR2，chap.8.3.）.1977a.Liberal Education in a Technological Society.Focus 6：1-4.1977b.Models of discovery.Dordrecht：Reidel.1978a.On how to decide what to do.Bell Journal of Economics 9：494-507.（Reprinted in MOBR2，chap.8.5.）.1978b.Rationality as process and product of thought.American Economic Review, Proceedings 68：1-16.（Reprinted in MOBR2，chap.8.4.）.1979a.Models of thought.Vol.1.New Haven, CT：Yale University Press.1979b.On parsimonious explanations of production relations.Scandinavian Journal of Economics 81：459-474.（Reprinted in MOBR1，chap.4.4.）.1980.「I shall be unable to accept your invitation.」Chronicle of Higher Education 20（4）（March 24，1980）：19.1981.The sciences of the artifcial.2nd ed.Cambridge, MA：M.I.T.Press.1982a.Models of bounded rationality.Vol.1-2.Cambridge, MA：M.I.T.Press.1982b.「Accurate predictions and fixed point theorems」：Comments.Social Science Information 21：605-612，622-626.1988.Unclad emperors.A case of mistaken identity.The Mathematical Intelligencer 10（1）：11-14；10（2）：10-11，12.1989.Models of thought.Vol.2.New Haven, CT：Yale University Press and A.ANDO.1961.Aggregation of variables in dynamic systems.Econometrica 29：111-38.（Reprinted in MOBR1，chap.4.2.），and M.BARENFELD.1969.Information-processing analysis of perceptual processes in problem solving.Psychological Review 76：473-83.（Reprinted in MOT1，chap.6.2.），and W.R.DIVINE.1941.Controlling factors in a human experiment.Public Administration Review 1：485-92.，W.R.DIVINE, E.M.COOPER, and M.CHERNIN.1941.Determining work load for professional staff in a public welfare agency.Berkeley：Bureau of Public Administration, University of California.，and K.A.ERICSSON.1984.Protocol analysis.Cambridge, MA：M.I.T.Press.，and K.J.GILMARTIN.1973.A simulation of memory for chess positions.Cognitive Psychology 5：29-46.（Reprinted in MOT1，chap.6.3.）

H. GUETZKOW, G.KOZMETSKY, and G.TYNDALL.1954.Centralization and decentralization in organizing the controller's department.New York：Controllership Foundation.，and D.HAWKINS.1949.Note：Some conditions of macroeconomic stability.Econometrica 17：245-248.（Reprinted in MOBR1，chap.4.1.），and J.R.HAYES.1976.The understanding process：Problem isomorphs.Cognitive Psychology 8：165-90.（Reprinted in MOT1，chap.7.2.），and Q.JING.1989.Recognizing, thinking, and learning as information processes.Proceedings of the International Congress of Psychology（Melbourne）27：13-29.，and K.KOTOVSKY.1963.Human acquisition of concepts for sequential patterns.Psychological Review 70：534-546.（Reprinted in MOT1，chap.5.1.），R.W.SHEPHARD, and F.W.SHARP.1943.Fire risks and fire losses.Berkeley：Bureau of Public Administration, University of California.，and L.SiKL6ssy.1972.Representation and meaning.Englewood Cliffs, NJ：Prentice-Hall.D.R.SMITHBURG, and V.A.THOMPSON.1950.Public Administration.New York：Alfred A.Knopf.

SMITH, E. D.1928.Psychology for executives.New York：Harper&Row.

SNOW, C. P.1959.The two cultures and the scientifc revolution.Cambridge：Cambridge University Press.

STATLER, OLIVER. 1961.Japanese inn.New York：Random House.

STORING, H. ed.1962.Essays on the scientifc study of politics.New York：Holt, Rinehart&Winston.

STRACHEY, C. S.1952.Logical or non-mathematical programmes.Proceedings of the Association for Computing Machinery 46-49.

TAYLOR, D. W.1960.Thinking and creativity.Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences 1：108-127.

THACKRAY, A. 1984.CASBS：Notes toward a history.In Annual Report，1984，Center for Advanced Study in the Behavioral Sciences（pp.59-71）.Stanford, CA：Center for Advanced Study in the Behavioral Sciences.

TICHOMIROV, O. K.，and E.D.POZNYANSKAYA.1965.An investigation of visual search as a means of analyzing heuristics.Soviet Psychology 5：2-15.

TOFFLER, A. 1970.Future shock.New York：Random House.

TOLMAN, E. C.1932.Purposive behavior in animals and men.Watkins Glen, NY：Century.TSAO, C.1929.Dream of the red chamber.New York：Doubleday, Doran.

TURING, A. M.1936.On computable numbers, with an application to the Entscheidungsproblem.Proceedings of the London Mathematical Society（series 2）：42：230-265.1950.Computing machinery and intelligence.Mind 59：433-450.

U. S.President's Research Committee on Recent Social Trends.1933.Recent social trends.New York：McGraw-Hill.

WALTER, W. F.1953.The living brain.New York：Norton.

WERTHEIMER, M. 1945.Productive thinking.New York：Harper&c Row.

WHITE, L. D.1926.Introduction to the study of public administration.New York：Macmillan.

WHITEHEAD, A. N.，and B.RUSSELL，1935.Principia Mathematica.Vol.1，2nd ed.，reprinted.Cambridge：The University Press.

WIENER, N. 1948.Cybernetics.New York：Wiley.

WILKES, M. V.，D.J.WHEELER, and S.GILL.1951.The preparation of programs for an electronic digital computer.Reading, MA：Addison-Wesley.

WILLIAMS, D. S.1969.Computer program organization induced by problem examples.Ph.D.diss.，Carnegie Mellon University.（Reprinted in Simon and Siklossy, eds.，1972.）

WILLIAMS, T. G.1965.Some studies in game playing with a digital computer.Ph.D.diss.Carnegie Institute of Technology.（Reprinted in Simon and Siklossy, eds.，1972.）

Wu, C. 1953.Monkey.Trans.Arthur Waley.New York：John Day.

Yu, B.，W. ZHANG, Q.JING, R.PENG, H.SIMON, and G.ZHANG.1985.STM capacity for Chinese and English language materials.Memory and Cognition 13：202-207.（Reprinted in MOT2，chap.2.5.）

YULE, G. U.1924.A mathematical theory of evolution, based on the conclusions of Dr.J.C.Willis, F.R.S.Philosophical Transactions, B 213：21-83.

ZHANG, G.，and H. A.SIMON.1985.STM capacity for Chinese words and idioms：Chunking and acoustical loop hypotheses.Memory and Cognition 13：193-201.（Reprinted in MOT2，chap.2.4.）

### 02

[1] Dorothea Isabel Pye Simon（1913—2002 年），西蒙的妻子，在丈夫于 2001 年春逝世后的第二年秋去世。Dorothea 源自希腊语，有「上帝的礼物」（God's Gift）之意。— 译者注

[2] 赫伯特·A. 西蒙在 80 岁时写的这篇序以及下面初版时写的《引言》是本书的总纲。对于它们，用比较严谨、相对直译的方法翻译更能让读者领会到作者的本心。— 译者注

[3] 如作者指出，本书初版（1991）到 MIT 版（1996）相隔五年。— 译者注

[4] 这是 1996 年为新版写的序，写此序时，新版还没有出版。— 译者注

[5] 西蒙自传英文原版书名「Models of My Life」的直译。— 译者注

[6] 当代诗人保罗·瓦雷里（Paul Valéry）的诗歌，原文法语，意即「认真地说，如同说给自己听，如同说给身边的人听」。— 译者注

[7] 严格地讲，maze（迷宫）和 labyrinth（迷津园）两个词是有区别的：迷宫可能会有多个入口和出口，并且还会有死路；而迷津园是只有一个入口通往中央并返回的。但作者在这里只是从有分叉，而且前方通向何方并不十分清楚的一般比喻的意义上使用这两个词。书中没有关注这两个词的区别。— 译者注

[8] 参见致谢部分，在 Gardner Lindzey 编著的《自传中的心理学史》第 7 卷中有一章是作者的自传。— 译者注

[9] 旅游导览册上称之为五扇式开合设计，主要是算上了侧面两扇以及折叠的两扇，再加上固定的中间扇面。《牛津英语词典》中的确有五扇式开合设计（pentatypch）一词。

[10] 1 英里 = 1.609344 公里。

[11] Goldschmidt 的英文写法是 Goldsmith，中文译作「歌德史密斯」。—— 译者注

[12] 无独有偶，著名的基因学家赫尔曼·穆勒（Hermann Joseph Muller）在传记中也提到，基因学家斯特蒂文特（A.H.Sturtevant）也是色盲，也是在摘草莓的时候发现自己是色盲。[Carlson（1981），p.55].

[13] 大萧条（The Great Depression），是指 1929—1933 年发源于美国，后来波及整个资本主义世界的经济危机。— 译著注

[14] 1 英尺 = 30.48 厘米

[15] 直到今天，一听到或者弹奏这首奏鸣曲，尤其是慢板的部分，他总会想起吉妮，更确切地说是对记忆的回忆。

[16] 林荫大道公理会教堂（The Grand Avenue Congregational Church）是赫伯特很多同学的社交中心，他上高中时更是如此。他会定期参加那里的活动。

[17] 公麋党，又译作雄鹿党，是由西奥多·罗斯福领导成立的进步党（Progressive Party）的别称。— 译者注

[18] 我在这里谈及的经历，加上在芝加哥大学度过的时光，时间跨度是从 1932—1937 年，正值我从青少年到青年过渡而后成家立业的时候。这个时期的我和所经历的事情，对于今日的我，有着无可替代的关系。所以，我就用第一人称来叙述。

[19] 阿根廷西部和智利南部住着很多德国移民。

[20] Clark Gable，1901—1960 年，美国著名电影男演员。— 译者注

[21] 更确切的说法，我在这里说明一下：原来的新计划在罗伯特·哈钦斯校长（Robert M.Hutchins）到任前就开始推行了，即 1931 年执行。哈钦斯逐渐把老版本变成了新版本的新计划。这个计划强调让学生阅读经典，学士学位两年就完成。幸运的是，在我本科学业完成后，这个新计划才得以执行。

[22] 近年来，在卡内基梅隆大学，我强烈提倡给大学生开设一门公共基础课程 — 不是出于课程资源配置的需求，而是让学生在流行音乐、电视剧、活动、性和天气之外找到共同话题。我对于公共基础课课程设置的理念，直接来自于我在芝加哥大学求学的体验。

[23] 我也意识到自己的作品《行政管理行为》在写作意图和内容上几乎是全盘经验主义的，亦属于同样的经典传统派别。但由于我研究的是人类行为，书中的事实主要通过观察和体验获得。

[24]「你怎么就知道她的头发是红色的？」读者可能会问。是的，我以前听说没有绿头发的人，也没有红色的草坪。所以……

[25] 总统行政管理委员会是由路易斯·布朗洛（主席）、查尔斯·梅里亚姆和卢瑟·古里克组成的。该委员会由罗斯福总统任命建立，主要是为提升联邦政府的管理水平建言献策。该委员会的报告特意推荐了六位匿名人士组成，演变到今天是总统高级管理办公室的原始组织。该报告使总统和国会之间产生了激烈的政治斗争。双方对抗的激烈程度堪比围绕罗斯福总统扩大最高法院和任命新的自由党人计划的斗争。这些斗争对于暴露南方保守主义集团发生了重大的作用并结束了众议院自由党人多年统治的局面。

[26] 为了避免重名难以分辨的尴尬，我们就称萨缪尔·梅为梅毕，而斯塔西·梅为梅布。

[27] 自 1939 年 9 月，德国击败波兰后，纳粹分子在欧洲没有大阵仗的战事，直到 1940 年 4 月攻打丹麦和挪威。因此有了这一短暂的「静坐战」（又译作「虚假战」）的时间。

[28]「萨姆」是「萨缪尔」的昵称。— 译者注

[29] 美国宪法中最著名的案例之一，此案例确定了美国宪法中的司法审查先例。从司法角度来看，本案堪称法律史上最伟大的判例，在美国宪法史上有着极为重要的地位，奠定了近代司法权真正的权威；在全世界范围而言，这个判例也是开创违宪审查的先河。— 译者注

[30] 即有些奇异、凌乱。— 译者注

[31] 意指天生聪明。— 译者注

[32] 此处是西蒙的比喻。— 译者注

[33] 指斥大清洗、起诉斯大林主义的西方文学史上著名的政治小说。— 译者注彻宁挺喜欢讲塞列托高地战役（Battle of El Cerrito Hill）的事情。战斗中，戴维·普雷斯科特·巴罗斯将军（David Prescott Barrows，此人曾是加州伯克利分校政治学系主任，后来担任该校校长）曾经和警察以及国民警卫队一起保卫了海湾附近的高地，并在黎明时分发起攻击。他们得到通知说罢工者聚集在此处要密谋某种革命行动。在山顶上，他们看到两个流浪汉点起火准备做点东西吃。我不知道是否确有其事，但彻宁喜欢一遍遍跟人讲述这个故事。正因为如此，当局更不喜欢他。

[34] 威廉·拉里默·梅隆是银行家托马斯·梅隆（Thomas Mellon）的孙子。托马斯在美国内战时期积累了许多家族财富。他是安德鲁·梅隆（Andrew Mellon）的侄子，理查德·金·梅隆（Richard King Mellon）是他的堂兄弟。我到达匹兹堡的时候，理查德已经是梅隆财团的核心人物和合伙人。他和市长戴夫·劳伦斯（Dave Lawrence）一起推动了匹兹堡复兴运动（Pittsburgh Renaissance）。

[35] 鲍勃是罗伯特的昵称。— 译者注

[36] 西蒙和纽厄尔发明的让接受实验的人在执行实验任务（例如解代数题）的过程中，一边思考，一边大声说出来的以录取其思维过程的心理学实验方法。这里的核心是「一边思考，一边说」，而不是事后的回忆。— 译者注

[37] 经济学家查尔斯·霍尔特（Charles Holt）从芝加哥大学来卡内基工业管理研究生院，弗兰克·莫迪格里亚尼从伊利诺伊大学来工业管理研究生院，约翰·马思（John Muth）是我们的一位研究生。

[38] 系统实验室的工作并非一无是处。它对基础科学作出了巨大的贡献，不然的话，其技术借助于计算机后自动化的程度会更高；其培训项目也发展壮大，成立了系统发展公司。该公司多年来一直负责培训军事人员来操作远程预警防空系统和各种新式系统。

[39] 伯尼是「伯纳德」的昵称。— 译者注

[40] 1960—1961 年，我在兰德公司的时候，埃德·费根鲍姆让我留意这本书。

[41] 当代人工智能研究比较有影响力的群体，包括尼尔斯·尼尔逊（Nils Nilson）、约翰·麦卡锡（John McCarthy）等，认为形式逻辑为人工智能程序提供了恰当的语言，而解决问题就是一种证明定理的过程。这两方面的描述都大谬不然。但这里不是我跟他们争论的地方，除了文中几段论道以外，不作过多评论。

[42] JOHNNIAC，即 JOHN von Neumann, Integrator and Automatic Computer，约翰·冯·诺依曼积分器和自动计算机。— 译者注

[43] 1955 年秋天的这一段，是基于我在这些事情发生不久后，于 1957 年 7 月 5 日撰写的备忘录来写的，并非完全来自我对遥远的过去的回忆。

[44]「伯尼」是「伯纳德」的昵称。— 译者注

[45] 明斯基的论文在发表前进行了大量修改。1956 年最早的未发表论文版本对达特茅斯会议的内容作了解释。

[46] 早期计算机象棋程序的历史以及纽厄尔 — 肖 — 西蒙（NSS）项目的描述，见《象棋程序和复杂性问题》（Chess-playing Programs and the Problem of Complexity，1958，尤其是第 322—331 页）。

[47] 1962 年和 1963 年，兰德公司在暑期举办了类似的讨论会，进一步巩固了当年研讨会工作的成效。1972 年在卡内基梅隆大学还组织了第四次暑期研讨会。

[48] 指阿尔弗雷德·金赛（Alfred Charles Kinsey）及华地·帕姆洛依（Wardell Pomeroy）等人所写的关于人类性行为的两本书，分别是《男性性行为》（1948）及《女性性行为》（1953）。— 译者注

[49] 即性力。— 译者注

[50] 我看到年轻的秘书们走下最高法院大楼的台阶时，总会下意识地用手揪住她们的裙子，这样风就不会吹起裙摆。每当这个时候，我会很快与奥姆斯法官二世（O.W.Holmes Jr.）的评论产生共鸣：「你没看到这番风景，肯定是到 80 岁的时候了！」

[51] 阿里斯泰尔库克（Alistair Cooke）从查理·卓别林（Charlie Chaplin）的自传中引用：「生育是自然界最主要的事情。每个男人，无论年纪大小，在碰到任何女人的时候，都会衡量一下是否有一亲芳泽的可能性。」（Cooke，1977，第 26 页）

[52] 考尔斯委员会从芝加哥迁到了耶鲁大学。受米尔顿·弗里德曼的影响，芝加哥大学经济系已经成了坚持新经典学派的正统代表，完全不允许有其他可能的观点。鲍勃·卢卡斯就是新芝加哥学派的代表。

[53] 有限理性和组织理论在工业管理研究生院的失败，至今对我仍是一个真正的打击。我一直喜欢引用史迪威将军在自己和部队被赶出缅甸时所发的感慨：「我说，我们被狠狠地坑了一遭。」

[54] 比起我本能的不可控制的愤怒，这种让我克制的愤怒很有可能让别人觉得更容易原谅一些。很多年以前，有个朋友告诉我：「我母亲最伟大的地方在于只有在狂怒的时候，才会打我们。」我很怀疑这种反应很正常。比起克制的严肃，发脾气更像是挑衅行为。

[55] 哈勒将继续在系里工作。我很高兴这些事情发生后不久，我们又成了朋友。也许他意识到，我是在顺应时代的需要。因此，我们即使有冲突，他也不再锋芒毕露。他从卡内基梅隆大学退休后，在 70 岁时去了弗吉尼亚理工学院，在那里工作的十年间，研究工作成绩斐然。他帮助弗吉尼亚理工学院开展了工业心理学专业，还和弗吉尼亚的其他机构一起工作。

[56] 更精确一点来讲，感情的本质是事实，但对其判断涉及情感和价值。

[57] 这个主意并非来自于我的原创。在 E.G. 博林担任美国心理学协会的评论刊物《当代心理学》（Contemporary Psychology）的首任主编时，制定了这项政策。

[58] 我在讲话的时候，还没有国家工程学院（National Academy of Engineering）和医学科学院（Institute of Medicine）。我暂时不谈由于这两个科学院所带来的难题。

[59] 罗马俱乐部是商人和其他人士组成的志愿者组织，会员主要是欧洲人，其主旨是关注我们世界的未来。这里提到的报告是建立在针对人口、食物、能源和环境的计算机模型基础之上的。

[60] 强调勤奋工作，有效利用时间与节俭。— 译者注

[61] 奥斯卡·王尔德（Oscar Wilde）对此这样讲：「在特纳（Turner）画伦敦雾之前，伦敦的雾在哪里？」与以前一样，答案是艺术引导人们发现了自然。

[62] 普鲁斯特《追忆似水年华》里的人物，有「chez Mme de Villeparisis」（在德·维里普利斯女士家）一节。— 译者注

[63] 普鲁斯特笔下的人物。— 译者注

[64] 莫里斯·尤特里约（Maurice Utrillo），1883—1955 年，法国印象派风景画家。— 译者注

[65] 诺贝尔经济学奖的全称是「纪念阿尔弗里德·诺贝尔的经济科学奖」（The Prize in Economics Sciences in Memory of Alfred Nobel）。但我会用俗称。该奖项是由瑞典银行捐助，由瑞典皇家科学院（Royal Academy of Sciences）颁发。其授奖程序与物理奖和化学奖相同。

[66] 来自谚语「you can't teach an old dog new tricks」（老狗学不会新把戏）。— 译者注

[67] 1956 年乔治·米勒发表了著名的论文《神秘的数字七，加上或减去二》，指出人类短期记忆的容量在 5—9 个组块之间。— 译者注

[68] 这些手稿当时在苏联不允许发表，故而非法。— 译者注

[69] 边想边说（think aloud）是作者倡导的在现场（而不是通过回顾）获取被试验者的思维过程信息的一种认知心理学研究方法。— 译者注

[70] BACON 的命名来自弗朗西斯·培根（Francis Bacon，1561—1626），英国唯物主义哲学家，科学归纳法的创始人；DALTON 的命名来自约翰·道尔顿（John Dalton，1766—1844），英国化学家、物理学家，近代原子理论的提出者。— 译者注

[71] 我不能在此暂停下来为这个断言辩护。对于心理学家，这就像是异端邪说一样。但数理统计学家几乎无一例外地认可。我的理由和相关的参考文献，请参阅 Gregg&Simon（1967）。

[72] 这些都是作者主导开发的、模拟科学家作出科学发现过程的人工智能程序。— 译者注