Stephen Jay Gould.(2002).2021038The-Structure-of-Evolutionary-Theory.Belknap Press of Harvard University Press => Introduction: (Not) Like a Rock


## 0601Pattern and Progress on

the Geological Stage





Darwin and the Fruits of Biotic Competition





A GEOLOGICAL LICENSE FOR PROGRESS





A plethora of mottoes reminds us that political revolutions are never tidy — not a gentleman says one, no good omelette without cracking eggshells says another. Intellectual revolutions may avoid trails of blood (or they may not, at least metaphorically), but transitions in ideas can become as messy and complex as overthrows of temporal government. One world cannot be sub­stituted for another without leaving some loose ends and some substantial pieces of an uncompleted puzzle.

Darwin got a great deal right, and he organized even more material into an internally coherent logic of argument. But he failed to achieve resolution on several important issues (especially when cultural convention clashed with implications of his theory), including some questions of great salience for him. Following his customary frankness, Darwin made no false claims for consistency, and ambiguities remain in his writing. In so doing, he followed the prescription for greatness in two famous statements by celebrated Ameri­cans: “A foolish consistency is the hobgoblin of little minds” (R. W. Emerson, 1841, Self-Reliance).





Do I contradict myself?

Very well then, I contradict myself,

(I am large, I contain multitudes).

(Walt Whitman, Song of Myself, from Leaves of Grass)





Darwin's greatest failure of resolution centered on an issue that assumed cardinal importance in Victorian culture — progress (both its definition, and its empirical and theoretical justification). Our current world of nuclear weaponry and global pollution does not rank this issue so centrally, but we have never escaped its allure. Several key figures of the Modern Synthesis devoted books to the subject (Huxley, 1953; Simpson, 1947; Dobzhansky, 1967; Stebbins, 1969), while symposia and volumes still appear with great regularity (Nitecki, 1988; Ruse, 1996; and Gould, 1996a, for a contrary view).

Darwin's dilemma can be stated easily: The bare-bones mechanics of the theory of natural selection provides no rationale for progress because the the­ory speaks only of adaptation to changing local environments. (The morpho­logical degeneration of a parasite may enhance local adaptation as surely as any intricate biomechanical improvement in a bird's wing.) Moreover, Dar­win regarded the banishment of inherent progress as perhaps his greatest con­ceptual advance over previous evolutionary theories — and he said so, often and forcefully, as in this epistolary comment, previously cited on page 373, to the American progressionist paleontologist Alpheus Hyatt on December 4, 1872: “After long reflection I cannot avoid the conviction that no innate ten­dency to progressive development exists” (in F. Darwin, 1903, vol. 1, p. 344).

On the other hand, Darwin was not prepared to abandon his culture's cen­tral concern with progress, if only to respect a central metaphor that appealed so irresistibly to most of his contemporaries — that if the history of life em­bodied predictable advance, then imperial expansion and industrial growth might be validated, at least by analogy, as the inherent consummation of Vic­torian desire and destiny, and not merely as an odd and ephemeral bump on the surface of history. And so Darwin penned other statements with equal as­surance, as in this famous comment at the close of the Origin: “As natural se­lection works solely by and for the good of each being, all corporeal and men­tal endowments will tend to progress towards perfection” (1859, p. 489). Both opinions appear prominently and often in Darwin's writing, and they do not jibe.

This ambivalence on the specific question of progress highlights a broader issue at the center of Darwinism. Amidst the various meanings of Lyell's “uniformitarianism,” one concept has been judged as paramount by many scholars (notably Rudwick, 1969): “non-progressionism” or uniformity of state — the proposition that the earth remains in a dynamic steady-state of constant, pulsating, cyclical change without direction: a strange kind of ahistoricism at the heart of ceaseless motion. Darwin owed a profound intellec­tual debt to Lyell, including far more than the expropriation of a geological stage to support the play of natural selection (see both Chapter 2 and later sections of this chapter). By transfer and analogy, Lyellian uniformity also provided a methodology for the general formulation and application of natu­ral selection itself. Lyell's view of change gave Darwin a framework not only for the obvious features of gradualism, incrementalism, and extrapolationism (as often noted), but also for the less recognized ahistoricism of evolutionary mechanics. The bare bones of natural selection supply no vector for the path­way of life: environments change in their non-directional manner, and organ­isms respond in a continuous dance of local adjustment.

But the history of life includes some manifestly directional properties — and we have never been satisfied with evolutionary theories that do not take this feature of life into account (see Gould, Gilinsky and German, 1988). (Indeed, the stubbornly vectorial properties of paleontological change eventually led Lyell to surrender this key aspect of uniformity in later editions of the Princi­ples of Geology — the most significant alteration of his intellectual ontogeny; see Gould, 1987b.) Darwin felt that natural selection could not be accepted as a thoroughly sufficient theory of evolution unless this mechanism could also explain evidences of pattern and vector in life's history. But how could Darwin meet such a requirement if natural selection — as a central attribute of its radical character and not a peripheral aspect easily withdrawn or compro­mised — had been devised as a biological analog for Lyell's uniformity of state, or non-directionalism?

I have just epitomized Darwin's dilemma in its most abstract form. In the immediate practice of his century, one prominent example consumed nearly all discussion of the general subject of vector and pattern — the concept of progress. If Darwin could validate progress by natural selection, then he would solve his dilemma of how to extract directional pattern from an appar­ently ahistorical theory.

This context of validating a concept of progress in macroevolution estab­lishes an unconventional locus for a discussion — now to follow — on the key Darwinian subject of “struggle” and the nature of competition in general, but I am convinced that this topic finds its best fit at this point within the ba­sic logic of Darwinian argument, and that a failure to recognize this appropri­ate place has led many evolutionists to underappreciate the theoretical sig­nificance of much that geology and paleontology have provided of late towards the reformulation of our subject — particularly the significance of mass extinction as an agent of change, and the central role of vectorial pat­terns as a subject in itself. (To readers who wondered why I treated struggle so cursorily in Chapter 2 on the essentials of Darwinian argument, I apolo­gize for any puzzlement, while asserting that the subject — meriting all its tra­ditional importance — belongs here.)

Evolutionary biologists should never lose sight of a cardinal principle link­ing history and function — that historical origin and immediate utility repre­sent independent subjects with no necessary connection (see Chapter 11 for an extended discussion of this principle). Struggle and competition entered the ontogeny of Darwin's thought for a variety of reasons related to Malthus, the necessary hecatomb for powering natural selection, views on the pleni­tude of nature, etc. Struggle also serves many functions in the logic of Dar­win's completed theory. But I believe that one role may be designated as para­mount. Darwin used his distinctive views on struggle to validate the concept of progress as a cardinal vector in the history of life. He invoked his own in­terpretation of struggle — in particular, his conviction about the predomi­nance of biotic competition — as an “added” principle to guarantee a pattern of progress that could not be derived, without such an auxiliary, from natural selection in its most abstract and generalized form.

But logics of argument form webs, and no benefit accrues without a price, or at least a set of implications. The dominance of biotic competition could validate progress — and thus, in a vital sense, “complete” the Darwinian sys­tem. But the adoption of such an argument required that a premise be im­ported from a field external to the biological logic of selection — and such increases in the logical complexity of theories also court danger. In this partic­ular case, the domination of biotic competition as a patterning agent requires that the earth's geological history proceed in a particular way: for the stage of environmental change must permit the Darwinian play to operate (and domi­nate) in our real world. Even the most logical and brilliant theory can do no explanatory work if surrounding conditions never permit its results to emerge. (The expansion of H2O upon freezing may be both true and ab­stractly important, but irrelevant on a hot planet that has never experienced a temperature approaching 0°C.)

Darwin himself may not have felt the press or worry of this added commitment to a Lyellian earth, for his belief in such a world had deep roots, well an­tedating his formulation of natural selection (see his first three geological books on coral reefs, volcanic islands, and the geology of South America — 1842, 1844, and 1846). Still, the conceptual constraint of requiring an exter­nal license for an internally consistent mechanism has operated as a distinc­tive and problematical claim throughout the history of Darwinism. I shall, in this chapter, first explicate Darwin's argument about biotic competition and progress, then discuss the required geological license more directly, summa­rize the strengths and character of the unfairly maligned catastrophist alter­native, and suggest how an alteration of the geological stage might modify or expand the tenets of Darwinism.





THE PREDOMINANCE OF BIOTIC COMPETITION

AND ITS SEQUELAE





We all know that the most vulgar misinterpretation of Darwin, often willfully made for martial ends, holds that “survival of the fittest” mandates the subju­gation and extermination of people and nations considered inferior. We also know the conventional and proper response to this harmful distortion: Dar­win conceived “struggle” as a metaphorical concept defined in terms of re­productive success, not bloody battle. We can all cite the famous and stan­dard quotation: “I should premise that I use the term Struggle for Existence in a large and metaphorical sense, including dependence of one being on an­other, and including (which is more important) not only the life of the indi­vidual, but success in leaving progeny. Two canine animals in a time of dearth may be truly said to struggle with each other, which shall get food and live. But a plant on the edge of a desert is said to struggle for life against the drought, though more properly it should be said to be dependent upon the moisture” (1859, p. 62).

Still, the link of struggle with overt battle does play a crucial role in Dar­win's thought. He did include both biotic competition (the domain of overt battle) and prevalence in difficult environments (the plant at the edge of a desert) within his larger concept of struggle. And he did regard all forms of biotic competition, including symbiosis and symbolic posturing for success in mating — not only combat leading to death or injury — as modes of struggle. Nonetheless, by strongly emphasizing biotic over abiotic competition, and by stressing examples leading to the death of losers, Darwin did favor the close analogs of battle. Thus, his friend and supporter T. H. Huxley frequently referred to natural selection as the “gladiatorial theory” of existence and, in his famous essay on ethics and evolution (1893), urged human beings, as a pri­mary ethical precept, to determine nature's ways and then act in an opposite manner. (Gladiators, by the way, and to make Huxley's etymological point, are not happy or grateful people, but warriors who fight to the death with a gladius, or sword in Latin.)

Darwin's decided choice in advocating a predominant relative frequency for biotic competition as a mode of struggle forms the crucial link in a chain of argument that stretches back to basic beliefs about the fullness of nature and points forward to a rationale for progress and the need for a uniformitarian geological stage. Consider a sequence of five consecutive, but interre­lated subjects:





The rule of biotic competition


Prince Peter Kropotkin, the charming Russian anarchist who spent 30 years in English exile, has generally been viewed as idiosyncratic and politically motivated in his famous attack on Darwinian competition, and his advocacy of cooperation as the norm of nature — Mutual Aid (1902). In fact, Kropot­kin, who was well trained in biology, spoke for a Russian consensus in argu­ing that density-independent regulation by occasional, but severe, environ­mental stress will tend to encourage intraspecific cooperation as a mode of natural selection (Todes, 1988; Gould, 1991b). The harsh environments of the vast Russian steppes and tundras often elicited such a generalized belief; Kropotkin and colleagues had observed well in a local context, but had erred in overgeneralization. But Darwin and Wallace, schooled in the more stable and diversely populated tropics, may have made an equally parochial error in advocating such a dominant role for biotic struggle over limited resources in crowded space (Todes, 1988).

The shaping of diversity and the powering of natural selection by biotic competition — and not primarily by simple selective response to changing physical conditions — forms a central and recurring argument in the Origin. Three primary themes record its sway:

The necessary prerequisite of plenitude. If populations gen­erally stand at their carrying capacity, with numbers not fluctuating greatly, then biotic competition must dominate, for no group can increase except at the expense of others (while Kropotkin's underinhabited world can support more of any population if, by mutual aid, their members can counteract envi­ronmental stress). Darwin strongly subscribed to this version of the ancient principle of plenitude (see p. 229), arguing from his favored Malthusian base that a population's geometric capacity for growth guarantees the geologically instantaneous achievement of optimal numbers: “From the high geometrical powers of increase of all organic beings, each area is already fully stocked with inhabitants” (1859, p. 109).

Metaphors of competition. Since Darwin used metaphor so effec­tively, we can often infer his primary commitments from his choice of images. Darwin, as noted before, does cast a broad net in spreading “struggle” across biotic and abiotic realms — but war and conquest, combat and death, provide the principal examples of competition throughout the Origin. Why else did Tennyson's earlier line from In Memoriam (1850) — “nature red in tooth and claw” — become the canonical characterization of Darwin's world (see Gould, 1992a)? We may not know the particular reasons for success, but victory and battle set the appropriate context: “Probably in no one case could we pre­cisely say why one species has been victorious over another in the great battle of life” (Darwin, 1859, p. 76). Two species, previously isolated and meeting for the first time “are maiden knights who have not fought with each other the great battle for life or death. But, whenever . . . they meet, and come into competition, if one has the slightest advantage over the other, that other will decrease in numbers or be quite swept away” (Natural Selection, 1856-1858, 1975 edition, edited by Stauffer, p. 227). Calmness and cooperation may seem to hold sway, but lift the veil and observe the struggles to death in this vale of tears: “We behold the face of nature bright with gladness, we often see superabundance of food; we do not see, or we forget, that the birds which are idly singing round us mostly live on insects or seeds, and are thus constantly destroying life; or we forget how largely these songsters, or their eggs, or their nestlings, are destroyed by birds and beasts of prey” (1859, p. 62).

Explicit statements of relative frequency. Darwin often contrasts the relative strengths of relationships among organisms vs. response to physical conditions. In each case, he stresses the greater importance of bi­otic competition. Migration, for example, will affect species more by forcing them into competition with other creatures than by exposing them to new physical environments: “These principles come into play only by bringing or­ganisms into new relations with each other, and in a lesser degree with the surrounding physical conditions” (p. 351). Speaking of movement to oceanic islands, Darwin notes the “deeply-seated error of considering the physical conditions of a country as the most important for its inhabitants; whereas it cannot, I think, be disputed that the nature of the other inhabitants, with which each has to compete, is at least as important, and generally a far more important element of success” (p. 400). And, in his baldest statement, Dar­win asserts (p. 477) “the relation of organism to organism is the most important of all relations.”

Darwin's caveats, whenever he presents a prima facie case for abiotic con­trol, are even more revealing. Reports of biotic competition elicit only simple approbation, while putative examples of response to physical circumstances often provoke reminders that we may not be viewing the matter correctly, and that biotic competition may still be exerting a hidden sway.

The structure of every organic being is related, in the most essential yet often hidden manner, to that of all other organic beings, with which it comes into competition for food or residence, or from which it has to escape, or on which it preys. This is obvious in the structure of the teeth and talons of the tiger; and in that of the legs and claws of the parasite, which clings to the hair on the tiger's body. But in the beautifully plumed seed of the dandelion, and in the flattened and fringed legs of the water beetle, the relation seems at first confined to the elements of air and wa­ter. Yet the advantage of plumed seeds no doubt stands in the closest re­lation to the land being already thickly clothed by other plants; so that the seeds may be widely distributed and fall on unoccupied ground. In the water-beetle, the structure of its legs, so well adapted for diving, al­lows it to compete with other aquatic insects, to hunt for its own prey, and to escape serving as prey to other animals (p. 77).



And epidemic extirpations, not generally attributed to microorganisms in Darwin's day and therefore an apparently clear case of regulation by non-competitive forces, may be caused by “parasitic worms” — an organism large enough to engender thoughts about overt and visible competition between parasite and host: “When a species, owing to highly favorable circumstances, increases inordinately in numbers in a small tract, epidemics — at least, this seems generally to occur with our game animals — often ensue: and here we have a limiting check independent of the struggle for life. But even some of these so-called epidemics appear to be due to parasitic worms, which have from some cause, possibly in part through facility of diffusion amongst the crowded animals, been disproportionably favored: and here comes in a sort of struggle between the parasite and its prey” (p. 70).





Wedging and the causes of extinction


Darwin's most striking metaphor for biotic competition, invoked from his very first jotting about natural selection (after his Malthusian insight of Octo­ber 1838) to the Origin of Species, imagines a surface packed tightly with wedges, representing nature chock full to its carrying capacity. Such a maxi­mally crowded world provides only one path for entry — by forcing (“wedg­ing”) another creature out. Biotic competition rules with a vengeance: “The face of Nature may be compared to a yielding surface, with ten thousand sharp wedges packed close together and driven inwards by incessant blows, sometimes one wedge being struck, and then another with greater force” (1859, p. 67).

The longer version of Natural Selection, Darwin's original manuscript, presents an even more revealing characterization, replete with almost frantic images of crowding, an explicit focus on species (in other passages, Darwin construes the wedges as individual organisms), and the relegation of physical limitation to an underlying layer, usually not penetrated, while the real work of nature proceeds by biotic struggle in the visible region above (Natural Se­lection, 1856-1858,1975 edition, edited by Stauffer, p. 208):

Nature may be compared to a surface covered with ten-thousand sharp wedges, many of the same shape and many of different shapes represent­ing different species, all packed closely together and all driven in by in­cessant blows: the blows being far severer at one time than at another; sometimes a wedge of one form and sometimes another being struck; and one driven deeply in forcing out others; with the jar and shock often transmitted very far to other wedges in many lines of direction: beneath the surface we may suppose that there lies a hard layer, fluctuating in its level, and which may represent the minimum amount of food required by each living being, and which layer will be impenetrable by the sharp­est wedge.



In this exigent world of intense and ubiquitous competition, severity of struggle will be directly proportional to degree of relationship — most intense among members of the same species, strong between individuals of closely re­lated species, and generally tapering with genealogical distance (and ecologi­cal dissimilarity). As a result, new species tend to eliminate their ancestors and closest relatives: “Each new variety or species, during the progress of its formation, will generally press hardest on its nearest kindred, and tend to ex­terminate them” (1859, p. 110).

Extinction therefore becomes a consequence of failure in biotic struggle, for ecosystems generally stand chock full, and new wedges must be poised to make their move whenever a chink appears. All species become enmeshed in a perpetual upward spiral, running continuously just to keep pace with their fellows — the Red Queen hypothesis (Van Valen, 1973): “For as all organic beings are striving, it may be said, to seize on each place in the economy of Nature, if any one species does not become modified and improved in a corre­sponding degree with its competitors, it will soon be exterminated” (1859, p. 102).





The geological extension of wedging


If wedging rules the moment in a crowded world, then the extension of wedg­ing through time should build patterns of origination and extinction in the fossil record. Following the dictates of the wedge, Darwin presents extinction as gradual and natural — not as rapid elimination in the wake of environmen­tal catastrophe, but as slow diminution in the face of competition from “su­perior” forms, usually of close genealogical relationship (see Chapter 12, pp. 1296–1303, for a further development of this argument). Darwin chides us for ever regarding extinction as unusual, and draws an analogy to the inevita­bility of death, usually following a gradual course of prolonged weakening: “I may repeat what I published in 1845, namely, that to admit that species generally become rare before they become extinct — to feel no surprise at the rarity of a species, and yet to marvel greatly when it ceases to exist, is much the same as to admit that sickness in the individual is the forerunner of death — to feel no surprise at sickness, but when the sick man dies, to wonder and to suspect that he died by some unknown deed of violence” (p. 320).

Darwin counterposes this view of extinction as gradual failure in biotic competition to the alternative that both he and Lyell so strongly rejected — catastrophic global paroxysm and resulting mass extirpation: “On the theory of natural selection the extinction of old forms and the production of new and improved forms are intimately connected together. The old notion of all the inhabitants of the earth having been swept away at successive periods by catastrophes, is very generally given up” (p. 317).

Darwin centers his second geological chapter (“On the succession of or­ganic beings,” Chapter 10) upon an argument, framed in his usual mode of probing behind the literal appearance of an imperfect record, for the preva­lence of a pattern that would validate gradual, biotically-driven extinction as a norm for the history of clades. Darwin denies that much extinction occurs by simultaneous or coordinated removal of unrelated forms. On the contrary, he argues, groups wane slowly and individually as superior competitors wax, producing a distinctive pattern of “megawedging” through geological time. “The extinction of old forms is the almost inevitable consequence of the pro­duction of new forms” (p. 343). “As new species in the course of time are formed through natural selection, others will become rarer and rarer, and finally extinct. The forms which stand in closest competition with those un­dergoing modification and improvement, will naturally suffer most” (p. 110).





The validation of progress


For two reasons, Darwin could not find a rationale for progress in abiotic, physically-driven extinction and adaptation: first, a non-directional vector of environmental change can only elicit a set of meandering responses in the adaptive adjustments of organisms; second, the more serious challenge of ca­tastrophe and mass extinction raises the specter of randomness and death for reasons unrelated to the adaptive struggles of normal times — the wheel of fortune vs. the wedge of progress (Gould, 1989d).

But victory over other creatures in an intense and unrelenting struggle for limited resources does permit an inference about progress. Now species triumph because, in some sense admittedly difficult to define, winners are “better” than the forms they vanquish. And the more uniformitarian the larger picture — the more that macroevolutionary pattern arises as a simple summation of immediate struggles — so do we gain increasing confidence that replacement and extinction must record the differential success of globally improved species. Thus, progress becomes an ecological concept for Dar­win — not a deduction from the inevitable mechanics of natural selection, but a mode of operation for natural selection in a particular kind of ecological world. If crowded habitats, where creatures must struggle to the death for limited resources, represent an ecological norm on earth, and if geological change usually proceeds at a sufficiently stately and unobtrusive pace to per­mit the fruits of biotic competition to accumulate into patterns of origination and extinction through time, then we may understand why “organization on the whole has progressed” (p. 345). Darwin links all his statements about progress firmly to his ecological theory of plenitude and to the prevalence of biotic competition.

Consider Darwin's language and imagery (“inferior” forms “beaten” by “victorious” relatives) as he presents his key argument for linking the gradual geological decline of groups to the success of closely related competitors (a claim now strongly compromised by accumulating data on mass extinction — see Chapter 12): “The forms which are beaten and which yield their places to the new and victorious forms, will generally be allied in groups, from inherit­ing some inferiority in common; and therefore as new and improved groups spread throughout the world, old groups will disappear from the world; and the succession of forms in both ways will everywhere tend to correspond” (p. 327). Moreover, note Darwin's continual emphasis on advantage and competition in crowded ecosystems: “As natural selection acts solely by the preservation of profitable modifications, each new form will tend in a fully-stocked country to take the place of, and finally to exterminate, its own less improved parent or other less-favored forms with which it comes into compe­tition” (p. 172).

The link of progress to biotic competition in a crowded world had perme­ated Darwin's thought from his first formulation of natural selection, as this passage from the E Notebook (January 18, 1839) indicates: “The enormous number of animals in the world depends on their varied structure and com­plexity. — Hence as the forms became complicated, they opened fresh means of adding to their complexity. — But yet there is no necessary tendency in the simple animals to become complicated although all perhaps will have done so from the new relations caused by the advancing complexity of others.”

In the Origin of Species, all explicit statements about progress invoke a rationale of biotic competition, and employ a metaphor of battle. I find Dar­win's conviction especially revealing in the light of his frank admission that he can neither formulate a way to test his proposal, nor specify a criterion by which progress might be measured:

But in one particular sense the more recent forms must, on my theory, be higher than the more ancient; for each new species is formed by having had some advantage in the struggle for life over other and preceding forms. If under a nearly similar climate, the eocene inhabitants of one quarter of the world were put into competition with the existing inhabit­ants of the same or some other quarter, the eocene fauna or flora would certainly be beaten and exterminated; as would a secondary fauna by an eocene, and a paleozoic fauna by a secondary fauna. I do not doubt that this process of improvement has affected in a marked and sensible man­ner the organization of the more recent and victorious forms of life, in comparison with the ancient and beaten forms; but I can see no way of testing this sort of progress (pp. 336-337).



Darwin's most widely quoted statement about progress appears in the summary to his two geological chapters. This famous passage also includes an odd mixture of firm conviction based on metaphors of competition (“the race for life” in this case), combined with some discomfort about the absence of a crisp definition: “The inhabitants of each successive period in the world's history have beaten their predecessors in the race for life, and are, in so far, higher in the scale of nature; and this may account for that vague yet ill-defined sentiment, felt by many paleontologists, that organization on the whole has progressed” (p. 345).





Sequelae


The central importance to Darwin of a link between progress and biotic competition seems especially clear in the various ramifications that branch so richly from his basic proposition. All these sequelae point to certain “smoothness,” a form of predictability, an accumulation through time of the reasonable and little into the sensible and big. Nature is not capricious; supe­rior forms prevail for cause; their triumph breeds further success and wider expansion; change proceeds in an orderly fashion — not in a clocklike manner to be sure, but at least decorously.

Widespread and speciose genera usually include the ancestral stocks of later successes, for extended geographic ranges and large populations indi­cate triumph in competition, and good mettle for future progress: “The great and flourishing genera both of plants and animals, which now play so impor­tant a part in nature, thus viewed become doubly interesting, for they include the ancestors of future conquering races. In the great scheme of nature, to that which has much, much will be given” (Natural Selection, 1856-1858, 1975 edition, edited by Stauffer, p. 248).

If brought into competition after previous isolation, big clades from large regions will prevail over less speciose groups from smaller areas because their members have been tested in hotter fires of competition: “For in the larger country there will have existed more individuals, and more diversified forms, and the competition will have been severer, and thus the standard of perfec­tion will have been rendered higher” (p. 206). Thus the success of North American mammals in South America following the rise of the Isthmus of Panama “is due to the greater extent of land in the north, and to the northern forms having existed in their own homes in greater numbers, and having consequently been advanced through natural selection and competition to a higher stage of perfection or dominating power, than the southern forms” (p. 379). In a revealing metaphor, Darwin then praises “the larger areas and more efficient workshops of the north” (p. 380).

Looking at the complementary theme of failure, aberrant genera include few species because such creatures have been beaten by superior forms in competition (and not for a variety of other potential reasons including limited speciation, or specialization to rare and unusual environments): “Such rich­ness in species, as I find after some investigation, does not commonly fall to the lot of aberrant genera. We can, I think, account for this fact only by look­ing at aberrant forms as failing groups conquered by more successful compet­itors, with a few members preserved by some unusual coincidence of favor­able circumstances” (p. 429).

Since competition will be ubiquitous, efficient, and unrelenting in a crowded world, steady change should represent a norm, while stasis must re­cord the unusual circumstance of reduced competition — as in the “living fos­sils” explicitly dubbed “anomalous” by Darwin: “These anomalous forms may almost be called living fossils; they have endured to the present day from having inhabited a confined area, and from having thus been exposed to less severe competition” (p. 107). In explaining why so few pairs of living species consist of one highly modified descendant and one unchanged surviving an­cestor, Darwin invokes the high probability of substantial change, due to bi­otic competition, in both lineages stemming from a common root:

It is just possible by my theory that one of two living forms might have descended from the other; for instance, a horse from a tapir; and in this case direct intermediate links will have existed between them. But such a case would imply that one form had remained for a very long period un­altered, whilst its descendants had undergone a vast amount of change; and the principle of competition between organism and organism, be­tween child and parent, will render this a very rare event; for in all cases the new and improved forms of life will tend to supplant the old and un­improved forms (p. 281).



Darwin's thought lies best revealed in a remarkable paragraph from the Origin's final summary. All themes of this section now flow together — the de­nial of mass extinction (as Darwin borrows Lyell's favorite rhetorical trick of conflating this concept with nonscientific views of creation), the linkage of improvement in some groups to the extermination of competitors, and the strongest statement in the entire Origin about the predominant relative fre­quency of biotic competition vs. response to altered physical conditions. For Darwin now makes the boldest possible claim of all — an assertion that the ubiquity, continuity, and gradualism of biotic competition might actually per­mit us to use morphological change as a rough measure of elapsed time!*

As species are produced and exterminated by slowly acting and still existing causes, and not by miraculous acts of creation and by catastro­phes; and as the most important of all causes for organic change is one which is almost independent of altered and perhaps suddenly altered physical conditions, namely, the mutual relation of organism to organ­ism — the improvement of one being entailing the improvement or the ex­termination of others; it follows, that the amount of organic change in the fossils of consecutive formations probably serves as a fair measure of the lapse of actual time (pp. 487-488).



In summary, Darwin's link of progress to biotic competition completes his argument against evolutionary systems (like Lamarck's) that propose sepa­rate forces for progress and adaptation, and that, as an unintended result, fall into the disabling paradox analyzed in Chapter 2: palpable phenomena are unimportant; while important phenomena remain intractable. Lamarck distinguished a lateral process of local adaptation from a linear force of prog­ress. Adaptation, as a local event of potentially rapid occurrence, could be observed, but this diversionary change provided no insight into the orthogo­nal and more important vector of progress through substantial time.

Darwin wanders on the fringes of the same dilemma. He identifies natural selection as a force of local adaptation. He wishes to escape the Lamarckian paradox of orthogonal causes by arguing for strict uniformity and extrapo­lation. The palpable and local force of adaptation therefore becomes, by smooth extension, the source of all evolutionary change at all levels. But how then could Darwin render progress — an idea that we might dismiss today as a cultural bias (Gould, 1996a), but that Darwin, as an eminent Victorian, did not wish to abandon (see Richards, 1992; Ruse, 1996)? Natural selection cannot provide the answer all by itself and without auxiliary principles, for this force must work in Lyell`s world of non-directional uniformity. Natural selection, at the “bare bones” of its mechanism, only builds adaptation to changing local environments; the principle includes no statement about in­herent directionality of any kind, not to mention progress.

Darwin resolved this tug of war between the logic of his theory and the needs of his century by invoking a particular ecological context as the normal stage for natural selection. If most ecosystems are chock full of life, and if se­lection usually operates in a regime of biotic competition, then the constant removal of inferior by superior forms will impart a progressive direction to evolutionary change in the long run. In opposition to most of his evolution­ary predecessors (Lamarck in particular), who postulated a higher (and im­palpable) realm of causality to encompass progress, Darwin stuck with his single level of immediate and testable natural selection — and ensured prog­ress by adding a boundary condition about the state of ecology, rather than by devising an additional and untestable causal apparatus. By this ingenious strategy, Darwin managed to have his cake of unified theory at a single, acces­sible level, and also to satisfy his culture's hunger for rationalizing progress.





Uniformity on the Geological Stage





LYELL'S VICTORY IN FACT AND RHETORIC





I spoke in Chapter 2 of a “Goldilocks problem” in Darwin's views on the na­ture of environment and geological change. Since Darwin uses “trial and er­ror” (with the organism proposing and environment disposing) as the chief metaphor in his predominantly externalist theory of change, the outer envi­ronment (biotic and abiotic) assumes a more important role in the theory of natural selection than in most other evolutionary accounts of the 19th cen­tury. For Darwin, environmental change must be neither too little, lest the ex­ternal prod fail, nor too great, lest the prod become a determinant in itself, thus demoting the role of the organism. In practice, too little change only emerged as a serious option in a metaphorical sense, as embodied in Kelvin's argument for the restriction of geological time (see pp. 492–502). But too much change characterized the core of a geological system — catastrophism — that, if generally valid, would severely compromise Darwinism by the funda­mental criterion of relative frequency.

Darwin's need for a “golden mean” of geological change flows from his extrapolationist premise that observable and small-scale natural selection can provide, by extension, the causal basis for life's history at grand scales of morphological transformation through geological time. Darwin rooted his de­fense of this premise in the validity of uniformitarianism, as preached by his guru, Charles Lyell. The uniformitarian defense of extrapolationism therefore undergirds the third leg of my proposed tripod for an “essence” of Darwinian theory. This Lyellian assumption buttresses the ordinary operation of natural selection in the immediacy of any ecological moment, but the theme of the first section of this chapter raises the ante by including Darwin's treatment of pattern on a geological stage. The raw mechanism of natural selection pro­vides no direction for organic change, and yields no predictable order for life's history through time. However, by adding a set of distinctive ecological arguments to the bare-bones mechanics — notably the domination of overt biotic competition as a primary mode of struggle within perpetually crowded communities — Darwin could validate the central belief of his surrounding culture, the concept of progress, as a primary signal of life's history.

Thus, the “golden mean” of geological change became doubly important to Darwin, because both the general operation of natural selection, and his particular rationale for progress in macroevolution, require a Lyellian geolog­ical world. The specter of catastrophism also became much more potent in the light of Darwin's stipulation that biotic competition acts as the chief agent of direction in life's history. For if mass extinction (and other phenomena of “too much” environmental change) establish patterns in the history of life at too high a relative frequency, then biotic competition will be demoted, if not replaced, by an ordering force of opposite meaning — for mass extinctions in­troduce a powerfully confusing and potentially confuting new actor: the tum­bling, whimsical wheel of fortune rather than the slow and steady wedge of progress.

The norms of science dictate that major works be presented as objective explorations of data, with general conclusions derived from empirical evidence and devised late in the process of discovery. But most seminal books in the history of science can be read as briefs for passionately held, elegantly articulated, brilliantly advocated (and, to be sure, well-defended) views of nature. As a premier example, Charles Lyell, a lawyer by profession, may have pre­sented his epochal Principles of Geology in the conventional style of humble factual documentation. But this great work must be understood as perhaps the most explicit and most able brief ever presented in the guise of a major scientific treatise.

The sources of Lyell's success in promoting his uniformitarian view — which later emerged as such a fitting solution to Darwin's Goldilocks problem by describing an earth with a “just right,” intermediate and dependable level of geological change — have been extensively explored by scholars in the past thirty years, and a general consensus has emerged (Hooykaas, 1963; Simp­son, 1963; Porter, 1976; and especially Rudwick, 1969; my own first publica­tion developed some of the same ideas independently and in the midst of some embarrassing juvenilia — see Gould, 1965). Lyell presented a plethora of compelling and well-presented evidence in his favor (gradualism does, after all, maintain at least a respectable relative frequency among patterns of geo­logical change); but he triumphed as much by force of rhetoric, as by strength in documentation. Two features of his rhetoric stand out for effectiveness.

1. He invented a persuasive dichotomy, pitting uniformity and rectitude on one side, against catastrophism and reaction on the other. Catastrophism, Lyell argued, represented everything that had stifled the development of geol­ogy in a dismal past — not only for the falsity of claims for worldwide parox­ysmal change, but also (and especially) for the sterility of a method that sought to explain the past by causes that do not operate today on our slowly changing earth. In attacking his cardboard version of catastrophism, Lyell penned some of the finest polemical lines ever written by a scientist: “Never was there a dogma more calculated to foster indolence, and to blunt the keen edge of curiosity, than this assumption of the discordance between the former and existing causes of change.” Catastrophist geology became “a boundless field for speculation” that could “never rise to the rank of an exact science.” Lyell ended this volley with his most famous metaphor: “We see the ancient spirit of speculation revived, and a desire manifested to cut, rather than pa­tiently to untie, the Gordian knot” (1833, volume 3, p. 6).

2. He took advantage of a “creative confusion” by extending the umbrella of his single term “uniformity” over a variety of concepts with differing sta­tus — thereby attempting to win assent for claims of dubious merit by giving them the same name as other arguments that all scientists accept as valid. In particular, Lyell stoutly defended — and defined as “uniformity” — a set of methodological assumptions included within any full and proper definition of science (and embraced with equal vigor by all serious catastrophists as well; see Gould, 1987b): especially the spatiotemporal invariance of natural law and the actualistic principle that hypothetical causes should not be postulated so long as observable modern processes can generate the phenomenon in question, at least in principle. But Lyell also extended the term “uniformity” to a set of empirical claims about the natural world — testable statements that might be true or false, but emphatically cannot be treated as methodological assumptions, necessarily embraced a priori as a license to practice science at all. Two of these “substantive uniformities” influenced Darwin greatly, and have echoed loudly through the 20th century as well: gradualism, or uni­formity of rate (especially the production of large-scale phenomena by ac­cumulation of ordinary, daily effects through immense stretches of time); and non-directionalism, or uniformity of state (the empirical pattern of cease­less, often cycling modifications, without vectors of directional change). Lyell eventually abandoned uniformity of state, when he finally became convinced, in the 1850's, that the fossil record of vertebrates exhibited vectorial change, and when Darwin then argued so persuasively that evolution could serve Lyell as a strategy of minimal retreat, permitting him to retain all other major components of his world view, while moving to acknowledge life's directional history. Gradualism then became — and has remained ever since — the sole sur­viving cardinal claim of uniformity in the substantive mode.

In his most clever, and devastatingly effective, trope of rhetoric, Lyell ar­gued that the substantive claims of “uniformity” must be valid because the basic practice of science requires that we accept a set of methodological as­sumptions bearing the same name despite their truly different status (“unifor­mity” of law and process). In so doing, Lyell managed to elevate a testable claim about gradualism to the status of a received a priori doctrine vital to the successful practice of science itself. This subtle conflation has exerted a pro­found, and largely negative, influence upon geology ever since, often serving to limit and stifle hypotheses about rates of processes, and to bring derision upon those who advocated even local catastrophes. (Consider the now stan­dard story of J Harlen Bretz and his long reviled, but later vindicated, cata­strophic explanation for the channelled scablands of Washington by sudden flooding — Gould, 1980d; Baker and Nummedal, 1978.) In the obvious con­temporary example (see Chapter 12 for details), no one can comprehend the emotional vigor of the debate engendered by Alvarez's proposal for cata­strophic mass extinction by extraterrestrial impact (Alvarez et al., 1980, and the oral history of Glen, 1994) without understanding the historical legacy of Lyell's successful and tricky rhetorical argument against catastrophism.

Ernst Mach and many others have truly (and famously) noted that, for “big” issues, scientific reform proceeds largely by persuading the next genera­tion. Mach's claim has usually been cited in the somewhat cynical mode: one must wait for the old generation to die because nothing can change their minds. But the same transgenerational theme applies, in an oddly backwards manner, to false characterizations that win assent by force of rhetoric. Such misattributions don't persuade contemporaries who understand the subtleties of the real issues by direct experience. But, since historical memory tends to occupy only a narrow range from nonexistent to short among scientists, false versions begin to prevail as soon as the actual practitioners die, and card­board can quickly replace flesh. Thus, anyone who knew Cuvier, Elie de Beaumont, or d'Orbigny, recognized their mental power, their scientific integ­rity, and the considerable empirical support enjoyed by their systems. But when these men died, Lyell's characterization persisted, and “catastrophism” became equated with anti-science and dogmatic theological reaction. The la­bel stuck, and Lyell's rhetorical triumph placed catastrophism beyond the pale of scientific respectability.

The arms of misreason extend across generations. When primary docu­ments disappear from sight,* textbook pap can clone itself, and resulting legends then beget further fantasy with little hope for correction within an estab­lished system of belief. Thus Cuvier, one of the greatest intellects of 19th century science, a child of the Enlightenment and a champion of rationality, became a miracle-mongering apologist for ecclesiastical reactionaries who had thrust their fingers into the crumbling dike of superstition in a vain effort to stem the inexorable advance of Lyellian science. Consider just two charac­terizations of Cuvier from leading geological textbooks of the last generation: Gilluly, Waters and Woodford (1959) on catastrophes: “These, he [Cuvier] believed, destroyed all existing life, and following each a whole new fauna was created: this doctrine, called Catastrophism, was unquestionably in­spired by the Biblical story of the Deluge.” Or Stokes (1973, p. 37) on the progress of science: “Cuvier believed that Noah's flood was universal and had prepared the earth for its present inhabitants. The Church was happy to have the support of such an eminent scientist, and there is no doubt that Cuvier's great reputation delayed the acceptance of the more accurate views that ulti­mately prevailed.”

I don't raise this example in the abstract interest of intellectual justice. The acknowledgment of catastrophism as a viable alternative to Darwin's geologi­cal requirements establishes an important theme of this book, and a potent reforming force within modern evolutionary theory. We might pursue this is­sue only by assessing the validity of modern arguments in the catastrophic mode, thus continuing to ignore earlier history (usually because we accept the cardboard characterization of Cuvier and colleagues, and therefore regard contemporary claims as viable for the first time). I will discuss some modern rationales in Chapter 12; but, in this historical part of the book, I need to demonstrate that catastrophism contained important elements of validity from the start — elements that rebut Darwin's crucial claim for gradual accu­mulation of changes induced by biotic competition as the predominant vector of life's history. I therefore present the basic argument in the most important of all catastrophist texts, the Discours preliminaire of Georges Cuvier (1812, but in its canonical English translation by Jameson, 1818). I do not, of course, (claim that the demonization of catastrophism arose as a Darwinian plot, for Lyell’s effort long predates the acceptance of evolutionary theory. But I will argue that Darwin needed Lyellian geology to grant natural selec­tion (and biotic competition) a dominant role in setting macroevolutionary pattern. Moreover, I do not claim that Cuvier was right and Lyell wrong — thereby “correcting” Lyell's persisting unfairness with a modern version that would be equally false and one-dimensional in the other direction. Cuvier should not be resurrected as more right than Lyell, but his views must be reas­sessed as sufficiently valid to revoke the license that Darwin recognized as so crucial for granting a dominant relative frequency to gradual geological change.





CATASTROPHISM AS GOOD SCIENCE: CUVIER'S ESSAY





A central irony pervades the story of Lyell's rhetorical victory over catas­trophism. Textbook pap, extending the exaggeration even beyond Lyell's mischaracterization, has leveled two major charges against the catastrophists: first, that they downplayed or distorted geological facts to defend their a pri­ori beliefs; second, that they invented theories primarily to support a religious traditionalism linked to a restricted time scale and the defense of Noah's flood and other Biblical stories.

I call this description ironic because all leading catastrophists embraced a general conception of science entirely contrary to this mischaracterization. The catastrophist synthesis, as a working theory, rested upon two pillars, one substantive and the other methodological. Substantively, as the name implies, the theory regarded major geological change as concentrated in infrequent bursts of global paroxysm.* But, in a coordinating theme of equal impor­tance, this sequence of catastrophes imparted a directional history to the earth and life.

Most catastrophists viewed the series of paroxysms as diminishing in inten­sity through time. They also postulated a geological dynamics to explain the link of directionality with occasional paroxysm. The theory of the French ge­ologist Elie de Beaumont summarized the postulated mechanics of catastro­phism. The earth, as a result of “hot” formation under the nebular hypothesis of Kant and Laplace, has cooled continuously through time, thus establishing a primary directional vector of change. This secular cooling engenders a ca­tastrophist dynamics, for the outer crust solidifies into a rigid shell, while the inner matter, still molten, contracts in cooling. The “pulling away” of this in­ner core from the rigid outer crust creates instability, resolved not by gradual change, but by rare, global paroxysms, when the crust fractures and col­lapses upon the shrunken core. Life's vector of progress records an increasing adaptation to harsher climates of a cooling earth.

Since a coordinating vector of temporal cooling generates the entire sys­tem, and since many scientists and historians regard the theme of directionalism as even more central than the dynamics of paroxysm, several schol­ars have urged, in recent years, that the entire movement be redesignated as the “directionalist synthesis,” rather than “catastrophism.” The major “catastrophists” never defined themselves as a school opposed to a dichotomous Lyellian alternative, and therefore never gave their movement a name. The construction of such a dichotomy, with moral values attached to each side, set a major aspect of Lyell's rhetorical strategy.

Methodologically, all leading catastrophists adopted a distinctive attitude towards the geological record. They preached a radical empirical literalism: interpret what you see as a true and accurate record of actual events, and in­terpolate nothing. If horizontal strata overlie a sequence of broken and tilted beds, then a catastrophe must have terminated one world and initiated an­other, as the geological discontinuity implies. If one fauna disappeared at such a boundary, and younger beds contain fossils of different creatures, then a mass extinction must have eradicated the older fauna. The catastrophists advocated directionalism as a primary theme for the earth's history, and em­pirical literalism as a fundamental approach to science.

How ironic, then, that modern textbook cardboard should misidentify Lyell as an empiricist who, by laborious fieldwork and close attention to ob­jective information, drove the dogmatists of catastrophism out of science. To the contrary, the catastrophists were the empirical literalists of their time! Lyell and Darwin opposed catastrophism by probing “behind appearance” to interpret, rather than simply to record, the data of geology. For Lyell and Darwin, the geological record must be treated as imperfect to an extreme de­gree — in the standard metaphor developed by Lyell and propagated by Dar­win, like a book with few pages preserved and only a few letters surviving on each of these pages. Moreover, Lyell argued, the geological record has also become distorted in a systematic way that would foster a false concept of change if we attempted a literal reading. Geological unconformities and local extinctions look paroxysmal, but only because slow, daily changes rarely leave any evidentiary trace at all. We therefore can observe only the infre­quently preserved waystations of a true continuity, and we misinterpret the massive lacunae as evidence for rapid change. If, to cite Lyell's example, Vesu­vius erupted again and buried a modern Italian town directly atop Pompeii, would we interpret history by the literal evidence of a Latin culture suddenly extirpated in a (potentially global) episode of volcanism, then followed by the saltational origin of a distinct, but clearly allied, Italian civilization, accompa­nied by such new cultural artifacts as beer cans and electric bulbs?

Proper procedure in geology, Lyell asserted, requires that we interpolate into a systematically impoverished record the unpreserved events implied by our best theoretical understanding. Lyell and Darwin worked by interpretation and interpolation; the catastrophists preached empirical literalism! (I do not raise this issue to denigrate Lyell and Darwin, for I support their proce­dure as a general statement about scientific methodology. Slavish literalism should be shunned in general, and not only (as in this geological case) when we have reason to regard a preserved record as systematically imperfect. Still, I know no greater irony in the history of science than the inverted posthu­mous reputations awarded to Lyell and the catastrophists for their supposed positions on “objectivism” in science.)

In paleontology, catastrophism reached an apogee in Georges Cuvier's Discours preliminaire, originally written as a preface to his great four-volume compendium on fossil vertebrates (Recherches sur les ossemens fossiles, 1812), but published and republished separately as an “Essay on the theory of the earth.” Cuvier did not present his Essay as a textbook of catastro­phism, but as a statement about the roles that paleontology and geology should play in unravelling the history of the earth. Nonetheless, Cuvier's Es­say exposes all characteristic features of catastrophism as a science, and illus­trates the incompatibility of this geological approach with Darwin's prerequi­sites for natural selection as a chief agent of macroevolutionary pattern.

On the substantive side of catastrophism, Cuvier devoted most attention to demonstrating life's temporal directionality, and to illustrating the value of such a vector for inferring geological history and stratigraphic order. As his greatest contribution, Cuvier proved that species could become extinct (a phenomenon still widely doubted at the inception of the 19th century). In his major source of evidence, Cuvier demonstrated that the anatomy of some fos­sil quadrupeds lay outside the boundaries of variation within modern species. He also traced a stratigraphic sequence of increasing similarity to modern faunas in successively younger beds, thus documenting a directional pattern within sequences of extinction, and providing the earth with a meaningful history. Cuvier begins the Essay by castigating his predecessors for combining their grandiose speculative theorizing with an inattention to fossils and their stratigraphic positions. He then presents his concept of proper procedure in the form of a list of questions, mostly centered upon historical pattern and di­rection in stratigraphy. “Are there certain animals and plants peculiar to cer­tain strata, and not found in others? What are the species that appear first in order, and those, which succeed? Do these two kinds of species ever accom­pany one another? Are there alterations* in their appearances; or, in other words, does the first species appear a second time, and does the second spe­cies then disappear?” (1818, p. 65).

Cuvier's answer, leading to the birth of modern paleontology, affirms directionality in two senses: fossils from successively older strata become increasingly less like modern forms, and thus ever more “primitive” by conventional definitions of progress:

It is, in the first place, clearly ascertained, that the oviparous quadrupeds are found considerably earlier, or in more ancient strata, than those of the viviparous class . . . The most celebrated of the unknown species be­longing to known genera, or to genera nearly allied to those that are known, as the fossil elephant, rhinoceros, hippopotamus, and mastodon, are never found along with the more ancient genera; but are only con­tained in alluvial formations . . . Lastly, the bones of species which are apparently the same with those that still exist alive, are never found ex­cept in the very latest alluvial depositions (1818, pp. 112-115).



Cuvier expresses a similar interest in the directionality of physical history. He argues (following the Wernerian system) for systematically changing min­eralogy through time, and for a pattern of increasing restriction of effect, as an original and universal ocean shrinks, thus decreasing the intensity of catas­trophes as well: “The sea has not always deposited stony substances of the same kind. It has observed a regular succession as to the nature of its depos­its; the more ancient the strata are, so much the more uniform and extensive are they; and the more recent they are, the more limited are they, and the more variation is observed in them at small distances” (1818, p. 34).

Cuvier treats directionality as his principal theme, but the validation of catastrophe does not rank far behind, and the two subjects mesh into a distinc­tive and comprehensive view. Cuvier opens the Essay with an exposition of catastrophist dynamics. Interestingly, he begins, as Lyell did from the other side (and as good advocates so frequently do), with a potent rhetorical device: we see the world in an inherently biased way from our limited and daily per­spective, but deeper investigation reveals that opposite forces prevail in the fullness of time. Lyell began by questioning our undue focus on civil catastro­phes of death, famine and war, and by arguing that we overemphasize such tragedies as a consequence of their personal impact. We therefore fail to ap­preciate the far greater power of ordinary events to render history by accu­mulation through time. Cuvier, in reversed perspective, claims that we grant too much power to the calm of daily life because we live within its immediate, surrounding pervasiveness. We therefore fail to realize that rare and unusual events set the basic pattern of history. After a preliminary discussion about the data and power of natural history as a science, Cuvier begins his Essay with a striking image devised to equate catastrophism with a broad and gen­erous vision of reality:

When the traveller passes through those fertile plains where gently-flow­ing streams nourish in their course an abundant vegetation, and where the soil, inhabited by a numerous population, adorned with flourishing villages, opulent cities, and superb monuments, is never disturbed except by the ravages of war and the oppression of tyrants, he is not led to sus­pect that nature also has had her intestine wars, and that the surface of the globe has been much convulsed by successive revolutions and various catastrophes. But his ideas change as soon as he digs into that soil which presents such a peaceful aspect, or ascends the hills which border the plain; they are expanded, if I may use the expression, in proportion to the expansion of his view; and they begin to embrace the full extent and grandeur of those ancient events (pp. 29-30).



The next several sections of the Essay present, in sequence, a framework for regarding catastrophe as the primary agent of geological change — “proofs of revolutions”; “proofs that revolutions have been numerous”; “proofs that revolutions have been sudden”; “proofs of the occurrence of revolutions be­fore the existence of living beings.” Cuvier then examines, as Lyell did but to reach an opposite conclusion, the efficacy of modern causes, declaring them insufficient to render the events of catastrophic episodes. Cuvier's words — in the most famous passage of his entire oeuvre — have usually been cited out of context, to equate catastrophism with despair and even with hostility to sci­entific explanation. But, clearly, Cuvier harbored no such intent. He does ex­press some regret at the discordance between catastrophic and daily causes — for the task of science would become easier if present forces sufficed. But the significance of the geological record lies in its potential for documenting the catastrophic causes:

It has long been considered possible to explain the more ancient revolu­tions on its surface by means of these still existing causes; in the same manner as it is found easy to explain past events in political history, by an acquaintance with the passions and intrigues of the present day. But we shall presently see that unfortunately this is not the case in physical history; the thread of operation is here broken, the march of nature is changed, and none of the agents that she now employs were sufficient for the production of her ancient works [or, to cite Cuvier's most famous line in its French original — le fil des operations est rompu; la marche de la na­ture est changee; et aucun des agens qu'elle emploie aujourd'hui ne lui auroit suffi pour produire ses anciens ouvrages] (1818, p. 44; 1812, P. 17).



Note Cuvier's careful choice of words. He does not appeal to mystery by stat­ing that current causes didn't work in an uninterpretable past; rather, he deems modern causes insufficient to explain the evidence for historical catas­trophes. We must therefore study the geological record directly if we wish to resolve the causes of catastrophes. I find nothing objectionable, or contrary to good scientific methodology, in this argument.

Cuvier summarizes the substantive part of his Essay in a paragraph that unites catastrophe with directionality, and the physical record with the bio­logical history of the earth:

Life, therefore, has been often disturbed on this earth by terrible events — calamities which, at their commencement, have perhaps moved and overturned to a great depth the entire outer crust of the globe, but which, since these first commotions, have uniformly acted at a less depth [sic] and less generally. Numberless living beings have been the victims of these catastrophes; some have been destroyed by sudden inundations, others have been laid dry in consequence of the bottom of the seas be­ing instantaneously elevated. Their races even have become extinct, and have left no memorial of them except some small fragment, which the naturalist can scarcely recognize (1818, p. 38).



The last line of this quotation helps to explain the longest and most bril­liant (though ultimately incorrect) final section of the Essay — the source of so much misunderstanding about Cuvier, and about catastrophism. Given the fragmentary nature of geological evidence, and the tendency for such evi­dence to become more and more inadequate as we penetrate deeper into time, our best empirical hope for understanding catastrophes lies in a detailed study of the most recent event. By coordinating two sources of evidence — natural history for estimating the effect of ordinary causes since the last par­oxysm, and civil history (because the last catastrophe occurred within human memory) — we might characterize at least one event well enough to build a model for the generality. Cuvier therefore scans the oldest records of all cul­tures, rejecting some as fabulous, adjusting and coordinating others, and finally reaching the conclusion that “the crust of our globe has been subjected to a great and sudden revolution, the epoch of which cannot be dated much farther back than five or six thousand years ago” (1818, p. 166). Since West­ern culture recorded this event as Noah's flood, and since Cuvier used the Bible as one source of information about this episode, posterity has interpreted this section of the Essay as a tortured exercise in Christian apologetics — thus affirming the usual interpretation of catastrophism as theological reaction.

But Cuvier proceeds with a precisely opposite intent, and his Essay there­fore becomes a seminal work of Enlightenment humanism. Cuvier does not marshall geological and civil history to support the biblical account of Noah's flood; rather, he uses the Old Testament as one source among many in a broad effort to unite the traditions of disparate fields towards a common in­tellectual goal. Of course Cuvier cites the Bible — as one legitimate source for making historical inferences, but with no favored status. Cuvier pays as much attention to the traditions of the Assyrians, the Parsis and the Hindus, and he grants even more credence to the records of ancient China. His evidence for the last catastrophe does not rest upon scriptural assertion, but on a supposed confluence of differing empirical sources, as the lengthy title for this chapter of the Essay proclaims: “The concurrence of historical and traditionary testi­monies, respecting a comparatively recent renewal of the human race, and their agreement with the proofs that are furnished by the operations of na­ture.”

Cuvier's Essay also stresses the methodology of catastrophism, particularly the empirical literalism of its favored approach to the geological record. Cuvier, even more strongly than Lyell, dismisses the speculative tradition pur­sued by previous generations, with their grandiloquent claims for comprehensive grasp, but so little attention paid to facts of the stratigraphic record. (Cuvier even includes Lyell's hero, James Hutton, among the speculative sys­tem builders, though praising him faintly for proceeding “with more cau­tion.”) True scientific progress now demands a methodological revolt — a scaling down of explanatory focus from fuzzy and grand theorizing to imme­diate and palpable observation, a move from the armchair to the field and museum. Progress also demands the specific coordination of two empirical sources — stratigraphic succession as documented by fieldwork, and taxonomic knowledge of organic diversity as revealed in large museum collec­tions. We may designate the knowledge of causes as our final goal, but we must proceed by voluminous and coordinated study of the empirical record:

If, from the want of sufficient evidence, these questions cannot be satisfactorily answered, how shall we be able to explain the causes of the presently existing state of our globe ... Naturalists seem to have scarcely any idea of the propriety of investigating facts before they construct their systems. The cause of this strange procedure may be discovered by considering that all geologists hitherto have either been mere cabinet naturalists, who had themselves hardly paid any attention to the structure of mountains, or mere mineralogists, who had not studied in sufficient de­tail the innumerable diversity of animals, and the almost infinite com­plexity of their various parts and organs. The former of these have only constructed systems; while the latter have made excellent collections of observations, and have laid the foundations of true geological sci­ence, but have been unable to raise and complete the edifice (1818, pp. 66-67).



Cuvier's unwillingness to proceed much beyond immediate data deprives the Essay of any “grand” conclusion — perhaps for the better. Cuvier never specifies how the two substantive themes of directionalism and successive ca­tastrophes might unite to forge a general theory of the earth's behavior. He presents no proposal, like Elie de Beaumont's of later years, for a general the­ory of planetary dynamics. Cuvier's final section includes no general sum­mary, no stirring plea for ultimate solutions, but only presents some practical suggestions for fruitful empirical work, accompanied by a list of potential ex­amples. We should now focus, Cuvier argues, not on the most recent strata (which have been intensely studied already), and not on the earth's beginnings (which remain too distant and too different for adequate resolution), but on fossiliferous rocks of intermediate age — on the gypsum quarries of Aix, the sand-hills of the Apennines, and the “stinkstone slate of Oeningen.” “It ap­pears to me,” Cuvier concludes, “that a consecutive history of such singular deposits would be infinitely more valuable than so many contradictory con­jectures respecting the first origin of the world and other planets and respect­ing phenomena which have confessedly no resemblance whatever to those of the present physical state of the world” (1818, p. 173).

Lyell would not have disagreed with these sentiments; homilies about the primacy of observation, after all, top the list of clichés in scientific prose. As their primary query, both Cuvier and Lyell asked not whether, but rather how, science should treat the empirics of the geological record — and Cuvier's chief difference with Lyell and Darwin centered upon his empirical literalism ver­sus their commitment to probing behind the appearances of a systematically imperfect record. A dramatic example of this distinction occurs at a key point in Cuvier's Essay, and serves to illustrate the real and continuing contrast between legitimate themes in catastrophism versus Darwin's need for a uniformitarian geology based upon the accumulation of small effects. In Section 30 on “proofs that the extinct species of quadrupeds are not varieties of the presently existing species,” Cuvier considers a potential argument against the reality of mass extinctions produced by geological catastrophes. No one can deny that many fossil quadrupeds represent species no longer living — for Cuvier had proved this point beyond a doubt. Only one logical alternative therefore remained to challenge Cuvier's own conclusion that these ancient species had perished — namely, evolution. Perhaps these forms never died, but gradually changed into different species now extant. Lamarck, Cuvier's clos­est colleague, had been advocating this idea for more than a decade, and straining their former friendship thereby (see Chapter 3). But Cuvier replied with an empirical rejoinder that could scarcely be gainsaid so long as the fos­sil record could be treated as literally accurate. No intermediary forms have been found as fossils, while new species occur in strata directly atop the doomed faunas:

This objection may appear strong to those who believe in the indefinite possibility of change of forms in organized bodies, and think that during a succession of ages, and by alterations of habitudes, all the species may change into each other, or one of them give birth to all the rest. Yet to these persons the following answer may be given from their own system: If the species have changed by degrees, as they assume, we ought to find traces of this gradual modification. Thus, between the Palaeotherium and the species of our own days, we should be able to discover some in­termediate forms; and yet no such discovery has ever been made. Since the bowels of the earth have not preserved monuments of this strange ge­nealogy, we have a right to conclude, That the ancient and now extinct species were as permanent in their forms and characters as those which exist at present; or at least, that the catastrophe which destroyed them did not leave sufficient time for the production of the changes that are al­leged to have taken place (1818, p. 119).



Darwin, as we all know, did not challenge Cuvier's literal description, but argued that a woefully imperfect record had failed to preserve insensibly graded intermediates in almost all cases. And Darwin, with his characteristic honesty, also admitted that his entire system depended upon the validity of this approach to the fossil record: “He who rejects these views on the nature of the geological record, will rightly reject my whole theory” (1859, p. 342).

In another confessional paragraph in the same mode, Darwin wrote of his debt to Lyell: “He who can read Sir Charles Lyell’s grand work on the Principies of Geology, which the future historian will recognize as having produced a revolution in natural science, yet does not admit how incomprehensibly vast have been the past periods of time, may at once close this volume” (1859, p. 282). Of course, we now acknowledge the immensity of time and therefore continue to open the Origin. We also dismiss Cuvier's argument that lack of recorded intermediacy precludes evolution.

But Cuvier's claim retains force in a more restricted sense: the earth's measured history does not provide enough time to dissolve the appearance of mass extinction into gradual change masked by an imperfect record. Geology therefore does run “too fast” to explain these crucial episodes by extended gradualism through an imperfect record — and if catastrophic mass extinc­tions are, as many paleontologists now argue (see Chapter 12), more fre­quent, profound, rapid, and different in their effects than we had previously admitted, then natural selection in Darwin's accumulative mode, with biotic competition as a primary source of order, may become seriously demoted in relative frequency among the causes of macroevolutionary pattern. In this sense, the pace of geological change remains a vital subject for evolutionary theory, and Cuvier's last line still sounds a valid warning. For evolutionists committed to biotic competition by wedging as the primary source of macro-evolutionary pattern, new data on mass extinction may “not leave sufficient time for the production of the changes that are alleged to have taken place.”

Fortunately, we may proceed beyond conjecture in trying to discern Dar­win's personal response to geological systems that threatened the efficacy of natural selection as an adequate source for the larger pattern of life's history. Cuvier died while Darwin worked on the Beagle and Lyell thrust his meta­phorical sword (at least to Darwin's satisfaction) through the heart of tradi­tional catastrophism. But Darwin could not rest easy, in full confidence that geological change would always plod along at optimal slowness for natural selection. For a formidable challenge, similar in broad concept to Cuvier's but very different in overt claims, greatly worried Darwin during the last fifteen years of his life — the “odious spectre” of Lord Kelvin. Darwin's widely misunderstood response proves, once again, how clearly he had pondered and assimilated the logic of his theory — and how much he required the slowness and uniformity of geological change.





DARWIN'S GEOLOGICAL NEED AND KELVIN'S ODIOUS SPECTRE





The familiar story of Lord Kelvin's incursion into geology has usually been re­counted as a morality play. In basic outline, arrogant physics invades, but beleaguered natural history holds the line and triumphs, ultimately in a twist of delicious irony. I won't dispute this basic outline, but an attention to detail does compromise the traditional moral message, while also providing a strik­ing example of Darwin's geological commitments.

In 1866, William Thomson, the future Lord Kelvin, published one of the most arrogant documents in the history of science — a one-paragraph paper (with an appended calculation) boldly entitled “The 'Doctrine of Uniformity' in Geology Briefly Refuted.” This manifesto became the stalking horse in Kel­vin's 40-year campaign to refute the substantive uniformities of rate and state (see pp. 479–484) by arguing that the earth's limited age did not provide enough time for explanations based solely on the accumulation of small ef­fects produced by causes acting at current rates. Over the years, Kelvin devel­oped a set of arguments, yielding broad ranges rather than precise ages, and based on limits to the age of both the sun (derived from estimates of meteoric influx), and of the earth (derived from outflow of heat and rotational slowing by tidal friction). Kelvin originally favored a date of some 100 million years (with an upper bound at 400 million), but he refined his estimates downward as the years passed, and finally settled upon a limited span of only 10-30 mil­lion years (at least for the duration of a solidified outer crust).

In Kelvin's most famous argument (and sole subject of the 1866 note), measurements of interior heat restrict the earth's age on the assumption that outflow represents continued cooling from an initially molten state. By mea­suring rates of outflow, we should be able to set an outer limit of maximal age for the origin of life by specifying the initial time of formation for a solid planetary surface. (In practice, such a calculation must remain highly uncer­tain due to in homogeneities of planetary composition and our own ignorance about the earth's interior.) More importantly, the entire argument rests upon an assumption that no sources of novel heat exist, and that all current efflux must therefore represent a residual flow from the original fireball of an ini­tially molten planet. When the discovery of radioactivity revealed an engine of new heat, Kelvin's argument collapsed. In the delicious irony mentioned above, the same force that dethroned Kelvin's limited duration soon provided a clock to measure the earth's actual age — and the billions favored by many geologists triumphed over Kelvin's long campaign for restriction. (Kelvin lived into the age of radioactivity, but never publicly acknowledged his de­feat. Lord Rutherford tells an interesting story of an early lecture that he de­livered in 1904 on determining the age of the earth by radioactive decay — see Gould, 1985c. Rutherford spotted the aged Kelvin in his audience and real­ized that he was “in for trouble.” “To my relief,” Rutherford writes, “Kelvin fell fast asleep, but as I came to the important point, I saw the old bird sit up, open an eye and cock a baleful glance at me. Then a sudden inspiration came, and I said Lord Kelvin had limited the age of the earth, provided no new source of heat was discovered. That prophetic utterance refers to what we are now considering tonight, radium!”)

At this point in the conventional morality play, the story becomes a homily in the Manichean mode: The elegant mathematics of an arrogant physicist expires on the Achilles' heel of a false assumption. The humble and patient observers of nature, who always knew, in the bones of their rich empirical ex­perience, that Kelvin must be wrong, but who dared not oppose such a pow­erful foe, triumph in the end. Empiricism wins the day: “speak to the earth, and it shall teach thee” (Job 12:8). In this canonical version, Darwin stands with his fellow geologists and biologists, forging a common front of natural historians against an intruder with no feel for the empirics of history. But this version requires revision to the point of near reversal — for the battle lines have been drawn falsely for two prominent reasons that have largely disap­peared from historical memory.

First, Kelvin's efforts did not inspire fear and ridicule among most natural historians. The great majority of biologists and geologists welcomed his at­tempt to replace a vague feeling about immensity with actual limits. More­over, most naturalists regarded Kelvin's figure of 100 million years as quite generous and fully sufficient to render geological history at any rate suggested by the empirical record. (Only later, in the 1890's, as Kelvin revised his esti­mate drastically downward, did significant numbers of geologists demur, ar­guing that their record could not fit into the time now allotted. Darwin's per­sistent but idiosyncratic opposition, documented below as the chief claim of this section, has been mistaken as a general consensus of geologists, thus lead­ing to the main error of the canonical version.) In fact, many natural scientists breathed a sigh of relief at the amplitude of Kelvin's early allotments. To cite one particularly astute observer from general culture, and to illustrate the dif­fusion of a common impression of sufficiency, Mark Twain stated in his fa­mous essay, “The damned human race” (largely written as a satirical re­sponse to A. R. Wallace's argument for intrinsic human meaning in the cosmos, as justified by an early version of the anthropic principle): “Accord­ing to these [Kelvin's] figures, it took 99,968,000 years to prepare the world for man, impatient as the Creator doubtless was to see him and admire him. But a large enterprise like this has to be conducted warily, painstakingly, logi­cally.”

Second, Kelvin declared no general warfare against a hidebound science of geology; the implications that he drew from his own estimates of the earth's age contained little to offend most earth scientists. Kelvin did haughtily dis­miss one style of argument carelessly pursued by many geologists, particu­larly the most committed of uniformitarians: the treatment of time as so vast that no practical limit could be placed upon any process — a kind of heuristic eternity, if you will. Most geologists accepted Kelvin's chastisement on this point, and happily altered their language because they felt unthreatened by Kelvin's estimate. One hundred million years seemed quite sufficient to ac­complish any observed or inferred geological work.

Kelvin saw right through the shaky basis of Lyell’s conceptual edifice: the conflation of substantive and methodological meanings of uniformity. Spatio-temporal invariance (uniformity) of natural law must be assumed as a basis for scientific inquiry into the past, but uniformity of state (non-directionalism of earth's history) cannot be inferred as a consequence, and can, moreover and to the contrary, be directly refuted by nature's own invariable laws. On this particular issue, Lyell could not have encountered a tougher opponent than the man who had formulated the second law of thermodynamics! The very constancy of the second law, and the attendant vector of time that fol­lows as a result, smashed any hope for a long-term, steady-state in the earth's physical appearance. In other words, uniformity of law disproved uniformity of state. (Eddington later gave elegant expression to this argument by describ­ing Kelvin's second law of thermodynamics as “time's arrow.”)

Diplomatically perhaps, Kelvin attacked Hutton's earlier version of the conflation (via Playfair's famous exegesis of 1802), rather than Lyell's contemporary presentation. Kelvin quotes Playfair's (1802) most famous lines: “The Author of nature has not given laws to the universe, which, like the institutions of men, carry in themselves the elements of their own destruction. He has not permitted in His works any symptoms of infancy, or of old age, or any sign by which we may estimate either their future or their past duration.” Kelvin responds by demolishing this false rationale for a non-directional earth (Thompson, 1868, p. 2): “Nothing could possibly be further from the truth than this statement. It is pervaded by a confusion between 'present or­der,' or 'present system,' and 'laws now existing' — between destruction of the earth as a place habitable to beings such as now live on it, and a decline or failure of law and order in the universe.”

Later, in discussing the secular slowing of the earth's rotation due to tidal friction imposed by the moon (a trend now supported empirically by evidence from daily and yearly growth lines of fossil organisms), Kelvin strongly as­serts that even a small directional effect, measured as seconds of slowing per century, strongly compromises the entire Lyellian system: “It is quite certain that a great mistake has been made — that British popular geology at the pres­ent time is in direct opposition to the principles of natural philosophy . . . There cannot be uniformity. The earth is filled with evidences that it has not been going on forever in this present state, and that there is progress of events towards a state infinitely different from the present” (1868, p. 16).

Kelvin criticized Lyell more directly for his claim that heat lost by radiation into space can always be reconstituted from other sources (chemical and electrical) — for such an article of non-directional faith violates the second law of thermodynamics: “These statements are directly opposed to the general prin­ciple of the dissipation of energy: and the hypothesis which they suggest is very inconsistent with our special knowledge of the conduction and radiation of heat, of thermoelectric currents, of chemical action, and of physical astron­omy” (1868, p. 231).

Kelvin then invokes his second law to identify the main vector of physical change through time: as entropy and disorder increase, the energy of most causes must diminish. Therefore, most geological processes must have acted with substantially more vigor on the early earth, leading to an expectation for more rapid biological change at this time, if changes in the physical world po­tentiate biological evolution.

I earnestly beg Professor Huxley, and those in whose name he speaks, to reconsider their opinion, that the secular cooling of the earth and of the sun “had made no practical difference to the earth during the period of which a record is preserved in stratified deposits.” There is, surely, good ground for Sir Roderick Murchison's opinion that metamorphic causes have been more active in ancient times than at present, because of more rapid augmentation of temperature downwards below the earth's sur­face; and it cannot be reasonably urged that a hotter sun is not a proba­ble explanation of the supposed warmer climate of the Paleozoic ages (1868, p. 230).



Kelvin's argument brings us to the nub of Darwin's objections. Darwin's strong opposition to Kelvin, a reaction that could almost be described as fear and loathing, has often been recorded, but rarely understood. To appreciate Darwin's intense reaction, we must focus upon the geological prerequisite for his account of evolution — a steady and intermediate rate of change, enough to prod, but not too much to overwhelm, natural selection. Kelvin's direc­tional geology did not invoke the paroxysmal specter of traditional catastrophism. But he had raised, in many ways, an even greater threat — for his chal­lenge operated as a double-edged sword to attack natural selection from both sides of Darwin's geological needs.





A question of time (too little geology)


Kelvin's estimate of time seemed generous to most naturalists, even to sup­porters of natural selection like Wallace, and to Darwin's self-appointed spokesman, T. H. Huxley. But Darwin envisioned natural selection as work­ing so slowly, especially in its progressive mode of extended biotic competi­tion, that any talk about limitation made him intensely nervous — for too little time could be equated with insufficient geological impetus for evolutionary change. Darwin had shown his hand in calculating a greatly exaggerated 300 million years for the denudation of the Weald (see p. 153), a figure that he ex­punged with embarrassment from later editions of the Origin (see Burchfield, 1975, pp. 70-72). Darwin had also urged readers to close his volume if they could not accept Lyell's views on the “incomprehensibly vast” time available for natural selection.

Kelvin's 100 million years sounded sufficiently long, but Darwin harbored deep doubts, especially in the light of Kelvin's related argument for a vector of diminishing rates of physical change through time. Kelvin's directional vector clashed with the most important item in Darwin's apologetics for the imper­fection of the geological record. Darwin had been troubled, for example, by the abrupt appearance of so many complicated anatomies in the Cambrian explosion: “The case at present must remain inexplicable; and may be truly urged as a valid argument against the views here entertained” (1859, p. 308). Darwin concluded that Precambrian seas had “swarmed with living crea­tures” not yet found as fossils. But the anatomical distance from the first liv­ing molecule to a trilobite certainly exceeded all later change from Cambrian forms to modern organisms. Following the gradualistic premise that amounts of change provide a rough measure of time, Darwin concluded that most of the earth's history had passed before the Cambrian explosion: “If my theory be true, it is indisputable that before the lowest Silurian stratum was depos­ited [Cambrian of modern terminology], long periods elapsed, as long as, or probably far longer than, the whole interval from the Silurian age to the pres­ent day” (1859, p. 307).

Thus, Kelvin's 100 million years since the initial consolidation of the earth's crust implied substantially less than 50 million years for the entire fos­sil record since the Cambrian explosion. The situation only worsened as Dar­win pondered Kelvin's views. If early changes had been so rapid and intense, then the earth must have spent most of its history just “calming down” enough to enter a realm where natural selection might work. Even more of Kelvin's limited time must therefore be allotted to a pre-Darwinian earth, and even less to a severely restricted later world amenable to natural selection as the cause of life's pattern. In January 1869, Darwin wrote to James Croll: “Notwithstanding your excellent remarks on the work which can be effected within a million years, I am greatly troubled at the short duration of the world according to Sir W. Thomson, for I require for my theoretical views a very long period before the Cambrian formation” (in F. Darwin and Seward, 1903, volume 2, p. 163). And, more graphically, Darwin wrote to A. R. Wallace in 1871: “I can say nothing more about missing links than I have said. I should rely much on pre-Silurian times; but then comes Sir W. Thom­son like an odious spectre” (in Marchant, 1916, Letters of Wallace, volume 1, p. 268).

Lest we construe Darwin's anxiety as exaggerated, consider the corroboration that he received for his distress right from the horse's mouth. Kelvin him­self addressed Darwin's greatest fear in his own direct and succinct way. The great physicist did not dispute evolution per se, but Kelvin argued that his own limitations upon time had effectively debarred natural selection as an important mechanism. Kelvin, following a cultural tradition that Darwin had transcended, believed that some spiritual force must be guiding the progress of evolution, if only because geology provided insufficient time for producing the observed order by mechanical processes. As Burchfield observes (1975, p. 73): “Kelvin was convinced that the complexity of life bore witness to the work of a Creative Intelligence. He was equally convinced that whereas natu­ral selection would require almost endless time, divine guidance would enable evolution to produce the diversity of life in a relatively short period. Thus as far as evolution was concerned, his arguments for limiting the earth's age were also proofs of design in nature.” Kelvin wrote: “A correction of this kind [on the duration of geological time] cannot be said to be unimportant in reference to biological speculation. The limitation of geological periods, im­posed by physical science, cannot, of course, disprove the hypothesis of trans­mutation of species; but it does seem sufficient to disprove the doctrine that transmutation has taken place through 'descent with modification by natural selection'” (Thompson, 1868, p. 222).





A question of direction (too much geology)


Thus, the vector imposed by Kelvin's Second Law — intense energy of early causes, diminishing continuously through time — troubled Darwin by com­pressing the fossil record into a restricted realm of adequate calmness. But the same vector also challenged Darwin by stressing the importance of early ra­pidity itself. Restricted time implied too little geology when considered in terms of Darwin's need for an intermediate amount of environmental change. But the rapid change on Kelvin's early earth implied too much geology on the flip side of impermissibility. Intense heat flows and high rates of volcanism and erosion on an early earth raised the specter of traditional catastrophism, with its paroxysms of mass extinction. This argument about rapidity opposed Darwin at both essential poles of practice and theory (see Chapter 2). Could a process like natural selection really operate effectively on a planet en­gulfed in such perpetual turmoil? Must other causes of biological change be postulated for the early earth — a particularly distressing prospect for Darwin, who yearned, above all, to establish a temporally invariant and fully general account of evolution. Moreover, the prospect of such a prominent vector clashed with Darwin's Lyellian vision of an earth operating with sufficient constancy of change that the study of modern causes would suffice for ex­plaining the past as well. Kelvin, astute as ever, had explicitly proclaimed the victory of “catastrophism” more for its explanation of a vector of diminish­ing intensity than for its theory of paroxysms (1868, pp. 231-232). And Dar­win, who had so assiduously explored the ramifications of all major ideas in natural history, rejected the directionalist aspect of catastrophism as firmly as he dismissed the paroxysmal claim.

Yet Darwin could not escape the directionalist implication, and he eventu­ally compromised on this single point alone. Putting his best face on adver­sity, Darwin added a passage to later editions of the Origin. He now ac­knowledged the vector of diminishing intensity in change, admitted higher rates of evolution on an early earth, and made peace with Kelvin's temporal restrictions by awarding evolution an ontogeny with a speedy childhood: “It is, however, probable, as Sir William Thompson [sic] insists, that the world at a very early period was subjected to more rapid and violent changes in its physical conditions than those now occurring; and such changes would have tended to induce changes at a corresponding rate in the organisms which then existed” (Origin, 1872, 6th edition).

In a reciprocal move, Darwin also quietly dropped the following passage of his first edition, with its opposing claim for slower initial rates of evolution — no doubt with regret, for this original argument had embodied his favored theme of biotic control: “During early periods of the earth's history, when the forms of life were probably fewer and simpler, the rate of change was proba­bly slower; and at the first dawn of life, when very few forms of the simplest structure existed, the rate of change may have been slow in an extreme de­gree” (1859, p. 488).

If all evolutionists had reacted to Kelvin in the same way, we might have learned something about conflicts across scientific disciplines, but little about Darwin's distinctive view. However, in a fascinating and little known aspect of this familiar story, Darwin stood virtually alone in loathing Kelvin's re­striction — and his reaction therefore reveals some important implications of his own strict selectionist logic applied with firm gradualist commitments. Darwin, as I have emphasized throughout, was dogged and relentless, fiercely honest and logical in his thinking. He wrestled with every major difficulty, working and reworking, fretting and fretting again, until he achieved closure or at least understood why a solution eluded him. He often became obsessed with problems (levels of selection, for example) that his supporters either didn't grasp at all, or didn't understand as sources of interest or trouble. Sometimes, as with Kelvin, he probably worried an issue too far, but when we grasp the source of his exaggerated concern, we understand the logic of his theory in a more complete way.

Darwin's opposition to Kelvin has been well recorded, but the missing piece in this historical puzzle, and the key for revising the false but canonical version of this story as a morality play, lies in Darwin's loneliness. I have cited the approbation of most geologists for Kelvin's efforts, but when we note the similar acquiescence of Darwin's two major English supporters — Huxley and Wallace — then the story becomes even more interesting (and the falsity of the conventional version even more apparent).

Huxley devoted his 1868 presidential address for the Geological Society of London to defending this profession against Kelvin's charges. Yet by Huxleyan standards — as the greatest literary polemicist (equalled, perhaps, by Buffon) in the history of biology — this particular address packs little punch. Huxley does not assert a distinctive geological way of thought against Kel­vin's unwelcome intrusions. Instead, he simply accepts Kelvin's claims, and defends geology only against Kelvin's characterizations. No one, he argues, not even Lyell (who had, by then, abandoned uniformity of state by admitting vectors in the history of life), maintains so strict and comprehensive a view of uniformity. In fact, the old dichotomy of uniformity vs. catastrophe has largely been swept aside, with both views yielding to an “evolutionism” based on slow, continuous and directional change on an ancient earth.

Huxley argues that neither of Kelvin's two major claims contradicts this new, evolutionist synthesis. Geologists can accept Kelvin's directionalism be­cause uniformitarianism has abandoned any former flirtation with the doc­trine of an earth in steady state. Geologists would be distressed by a truly seri­ous limitation upon time, but 100 million years provides more than sufficient amplitude for any legitimate geological purpose.

Coming to his key point, Huxley allows that some people (he does not mention his friend Darwin by name) feel a tug between Kelvin's dates and a greater age supposedly implied by the extreme slowness of evolutionary change. But this feeling, Huxley assures us, cannot be defended. We can only assess the speed of evolution by calibration against elapsed geological time. Previous assertions of extreme slowness flowed from geological convictions about immensity — as no purely biological data exist for a truly independent calibration. If Kelvin has now demonstrated that time must be shorter, we can only conclude that evolution has generally been faster.

But, it may be said that it is biology, and not geology, which asks for so much time — that the succession of life demands great intervals; but this appears to me to be reasoning in a circle. Biology takes her time from geology. The only reason we have for believing in the slow rate of the change in living forms is the fact that they persist through a series of deposits, which, geology informs us, have taken a long while to make. If the geological clock is wrong, all the naturalist will have to do is to modify his notions of the rapidity of change accordingly. And I venture to point out that, when we are told that the limitation of the period during which living beings inhabited this planet to one, two, or three hundred million years requires a complete revolution in geological speculation, the onus probandi rests on the maker of the assertion, who brings forward not a shadow of evidence in its support (1869, year of publication of 1868 ad­dress, in Huxley, 1894, pp. 328-329).



And so Huxley, bowing to the physicists, concludes that geology has devel­oped no legitimate reason for discomfort with Kelvin's dates, while biology has similarly failed to offer valid objection. Therefore, a little terminological misunderstanding, and a minor battle over professional turf, can be resolved into the sweetness and light of intellectual agreement.*

Huxley's acquiescence may not surprise us. After all, given his attraction to saltationist ideas, Huxley had never shared Darwin's commitment to gradual­ism and the attendant need for such ample geological time. But when we learn that A. R. Wallace, a stouter defender of natural selection than Darwin himself, also readily accepted Kelvin's dates, then we can better sense the idio­syncrasy of Darwin's concern. Wallace ventured even further than Huxley. He published several letters in Nature on the age of the earth and the measure­ment of geological time (1870, 1892, 1893, 1895a and b). Wallace willingly accepted Kelvin's dates, and he presented an ingenious argument to explain why some biologists had been fooled into believing that evolution proceeded so slowly.

Working from a theory by James Croll linking ice ages to changes in the earth's orbit, Wallace claimed that the last 60,000 years had experienced extraordinary climatic stability due to unusually low orbital eccentricity. Before then, and probably for most of geological time, orbital eccentricity had been more pronounced, prompting climatic fluctuations in local areas, attendant deaths and migrations of faunas, and a greatly accelerated rate of evolution. As an unfortunate consequence of our generally valid uniformitarian method of measuring current rates and extrapolating backwards, we developed the false impression from our recent (and unusual) climatic stability that evolu­tion must always proceed with imperceptible slowness. But the general pace of natural selection can be much faster, matching the usual rate of climatic fluctuation. When we recognize this “slower change of species since the gla­cial epoch than at any former period” (1870, p. 455), we can correct our false allegiance to evolution's perpetual sloth, “thus allowing us to suppose change of form in the organic world to go on more rapidly than we had before thought possible” (1870, p. 455).

Wallace then proposes a correction to Lyell’s estimates of time based on turnover in molluscan species. He obtains an age of 24 million years for the base of the Cambrian, proclaims himself in agreement with Kelvin's 100 mil­lion years since the solidification of the earth's surface (leaving some 75 mil­lion years for the Precambrian interval that Darwin had proclaimed longer than all subsequent time), and urges Darwin to accept this framework with good grace and confidence in natural selection:

These figures will seem very small to some geologists who have been accustomed to speak of “millions” as small matters; but I hope I have shown that, so far as we have any means at present of measuring geolog­ical time, they may be amply sufficient. Taking Sir William Thomson's allowance of a hundred million years for the time during which the earth can have been fit for life, it yet allows Mr. Darwin, for the process of development from the primordial germ, three times as many years anterior to the Cambrian epoch as have elapsed since that date, an amount of time which, I believe, will fully satisfy him (1870, pp. 454-455).



I find an ironic similarity between this tale of Darwin and his intellectual brethren, and the story of Solomon and the baby claimed by two women. The true parent loves her child so fiercely that she would rather give her offspring to an imposter than to see the infant dismembered in mock compromise. The false mother feels no such protective love, thus permitting Solomon's wise identification. I do not wish to push the analogy too far. Huxley and Wallace cannot be called false parents, but the child of natural selection had not origi­nated in their womb (or, in Wallace's case, at least not for so long a gestation, or so slow and prideful a growth). They had not nurtured this idea through so many years of thought, through such struggles of upbringing, to build such an extensive and coherent edifice of logic and implication. They could there­fore compromise, sacrifice a bit here, and trim a bit there, to preserve the entity, however tarnished. But, for Darwin, any departure from full integrity became unthinkable. Darwin also understood, however, that intransigence compro­mises the spirit of science, and that all good thinkers must make and admit mistakes. For this reason, Darwin separated his core commitments (the “es­sences” of my treatment) from postulates more easily compromised. To aban­don, or even seriously to mitigate, any of the core commitments might be equated with the unacceptable solution of dividing the child. A conviction about the generally slow and steady character of geological change, a prerequisite for the third leg on my tripod of Darwinian essentials, lay among the core commitments — for natural selection could not shape macroevolutionary pattern without this auxiliary support from another profession. We can only understand the intensity, and the loneliness, of Darwin's reaction against Kel­vin when we properly read his response as a cry from the heart of his entire system.











CHAPTER SEVEN



