Stephen Jay Gould.(2002).2021038The-Structure-of-Evolutionary-Theory.Belknap Press of Harvard University Press => Introduction: (Not) Like a Rock

## 1201Tiers of Time and Trials of

Extrapolationism, With an Epilog

on the Interaction of General

Theory and Contingent History





Failure of Extrapolationism in the Non-Isotropy

of Time and Geology





THE SPECTER OF CATASTROPHIC MASS EXTINCTION:

DARWIN TO CHICXULUB





Greatness shines brightest in adversity. The logic of the Origin's 9th Chapter (1859, pp. 279-311) — “On the Imperfection of the Geological Record” — shows Darwin's reasoning at its very best and most systematic, all in the ser­vice of resolving his worst problem. For, in this chapter, he must explain why the subject that should, at first glance, have provided the strongest and most direct confirmation of evolution, seems to mock, in its opposite message (at least if read in an empirically literal manner), the gradual and incremental style of change touted throughout his book both as a validation of natural se­lection, and as the primary empirical basis for confidence in the factuality of evolution itself.

Darwin's logic proceeds in a systematic way within the norms of scienti­fic discourse, moving linearly and relentlessly through the chapter from the problem with the easiest resolution (why do we not find living intermediary forms between modern species) to the most difficult appearance of all (epi­sodes of mass origination and extinction in the fossil record). The opening is­sue, representing a misconception and not a true threat, achieves an easy so­lution: evolution is a process of branching, not of linear transformation, as the brilliant “tree of life” metaphor, closing the operative chapter four on the mechanics of natural selection, had so well exemplified (1859, pp. 129-130). Few, if any, living species are the unaltered forebears of another modern form; rather, any two sister species have branched and diverged from an ancient common ancestor. Therefore, we do not expect to encounter living intermediates between extant species, for, although transitional forms surely existed, they died long ago and should only be found in the fossil record.

Having disposed of this simple error in thought, Darwin must now face the real dilemma that intermediates rarely occur in the fossil record either, where they should exist in abundance: “Why then is not every geological formation and every stratum full of such intermediate links? Geology assuredly does not reveal any such finely graduated organic chain; and this, perhaps, is the most obvious and gravest objection which can be urged against my theory” (p. 280).

Darwin's general answer stands out in the title to his chapter, and he in­vokes the crucial claim to solve each of the three issues that, in their increas­ing difficulty, define the flow and logic of his treatment. The very next sen­tence, following the quotation cited just above, states this comprehensive solution: “The explanation lies, as I believe, in the extreme imperfection of the geological record” (p. 280). This “argument from imperfection” became so indispensable to Darwin's dispersal of his major challenge from the fossil record that, later in the chapter, he ventured one of the most honest and re­vealing statements in all our scientific literature: a striking admission that the needs of theory had provoked an understanding of paleontological data that he otherwise might never even have considered. Such feedbacks always occur in science, but the empirical ethos of our profession leads us to underplay, or never to recognize in our own mental processing at all, this reverse flow from the expectations of theory to the perception and interpretation of factuality. Darwin's admission strikes me as wonderfully honest and self-scrutinizing, but also as potentially triggering a trap of circular reasoning, as the dictate of theory, mandating an expectation of imperfection, biases the reading of a fos­sil record that might actually be displaying more genuine signal than the “noise” of absence: “But I do not pretend that I should ever have suspected how poor a record of the mutations of life, the best preserved geological sec­tion presented, had not the difficulty of our not discovering innumerable transitional links between the species which appeared at the commencement and close of each formation, pressed so hardly on my theory” (p. 302).

First, Darwin presents his easier defense of gross imperfection at global scales, as he argues convincingly that we lack an adequate sample of life's full richness because both natural limitations (non-deposition of strata during most intervals) and insufficient human effort in a very young science (poverty of existing collections relative to fossils that could be gathered, exploration of only a small and geographically restricted percentage of the earth's fossil bearing strata) preclude any adequate sampling of life's full richness.

But Darwin must then admit that such general reasons do not resolve the second, and local, issue of why we do not find a “finely graduated organic chain” within single formations that do seem to preserve a continuous record of strata: “From the foregoing considerations it cannot be doubted that the geological record, viewed as a whole, is extremely imperfect; but if we confine our attention to any one formation, it becomes more difficult to understand, why we do not therein find closely graduated varieties between the allied spe­cies which lived at its commencement and at its close” (pp. 292-293).

Again, for this second issue, Darwin stresses the record's imperfection, now relying on discontinuity of deposition and environment in single regions through geological intervals. Strata may seem continuous, he correctly ar­gues, but most times contributed no sediment because accumulation only oc­curs during gentle subsidence of basins, and such conditions do not generally prevail. By the same token, the local environment occupied by a species in anagenetic transformation will not generally persist long enough in any single place, and organisms will track their moving habitats. For example, the shal­low marine habitat of so many invertebrate species can only continue (under conditions that also accumulate sediments with fossils) when rates of deposi­tion for strata evenly match rates of subsidence for substrates — and how of­ten, and for how long, can such a fine balance be maintained in any one place?

Having ascribed, to his satisfaction, both global and local absences of transitional forms to the general imperfection of geological records, Darwin must finally, in the closing sections of Chapter 9 (and spilling over into substantial parts of Chapter 10), rebut a third geological challenge to evolution, and es­pecially to gradualistic explanations framed in terms of natural selection. To overcome this last obstacle, Darwin must tackle the harder problem of an ap­parently positive signal against his expectations, rather than (as in the first two cases) a negative result of failure to locate an anticipated confirmation. To complete his argument, Darwin must now explain away the evidence for global episodes of apparently sudden mass extinction or origin of entire faunas.

We should first pause to ask why Darwin even considered this signal from the fossil record as such a problem, especially for episodes of mass extinction. Why did he view the prospect of simultaneous extirpation as an issue at all, either for evolution or for natural selection? Natural selection does not guar­antee the power of adaptation in all circumstances — and if environments change rapidly and profoundly enough, these alterations may exceed the power of adaptation by natural selection, with extinction of most forms as the expected result, even in the most strictly Darwinian of circumstances.

As a general answer — and as the primary reason for treating this subject within a chapter on modern critiques of the third leg, or extrapolationist premise, of Darwinian central logic — Darwin's hostility to catastrophic mass extinction does not arise primarily from threats posed to the mechanism of natural selection itself, but more from the challenges raised by the prospect of sudden global change to the key uniformitarian, or extrapolationist, assump­tion that observable processes at work in modern populations can, given the amplitude of geological time, render the full panoply of macroevolutionary results by prolonged accretion and accumulation.

The problem of mass extinction became acute for Darwin because geologi­cal paroxysm threatened something quite particular, vitally important, and therefore of much greater immediate pith and moment than his general meth­odological preference for locating all causality in the palpable observation of microevolution (see Chapter 2). Global catastrophe could undermine the ecological argument that Darwin had so carefully devised (see Chapter 6, pp. 467–479) to validate something more particular but no less important: his culture's central belief in progress, especially when Darwin had so increased the difficulty of the problem by constructing a theory (natural selection itself) that could not render this consummately desired result through its bare-bones mechanics. (For this reason, I discuss mass extinction in this relatively short Chapter 12, conceived as a counterpart to the equally brief Chapter 6 of this book's historical half — for these chapters feature the surrogate geological de­fenses of extrapolation, rather than the arguments from biological theory in­herent in the first two legs of Darwin's logical tripod, and treated in extenso in Chapters 3–5 of the historical half, and 8–11 of this second half on contemporary debates.)

To explain the general pattern of life's history, Darwin sought to extrapo­late the results of competition ordained by the immediacies of natural selec­tion in ecological moments. In particular (as discussed and documented in Chapter 6, pp. 467–479), he used his “metaphor of the wedge” to argue that most competition, in a world chock full of species, unfolds in the biotic mode of direct battle for limited resources, mano a mano so to speak, and not in the abiotic mode of struggle to survive in difficult physical conditions. If strug­gle by overt battle (which favors mental and biomechanical improvement) trumps struggle against inclement environment (which often favors coopera­tion rather than battle and usually leads, in any case, to specialized local ad­aptation rather than to general improvement), then a broad vector of prog­ress should pervade the history of life.

These two geological chapters (9 and 10) include nearly all of Darwin's passages and notable arguments for linking general progress to the extrapola­tion of momentary biotic competition through geological time. “The theory of natural selection is grounded on the belief that each new variety, and ulti­mately each new species, is produced and maintained by having some ad­vantage over those with which it comes into competition; and the consequent extinction of less-favored forms almost inevitably follows” (p. 320). Or con­sider this passage, with multiple metaphors of victory and defeat: “In one particular sense the more recent forms must, on my theory, be higher than the more ancient; for each new species is formed by having had some advantage in the struggle for life over other and preceding forms ... I do not doubt that this process of improvement has affected in a marked and sensible manner the organisation of the more recent and victorious forms of life, in comparison with the ancient and beaten forms” (pp. 336-337). Most famously, Darwin writes in the summary of both chapters (p. 345): “The inhabitants of each successive period in the world's history have beaten their predecessors in the race for life, and are, in so far, higher in the scale of nature; and this may ac­count for that vague yet ill-defined sentiment, felt by many paleontologists, that organisation on the whole has progressed.”

To bring the literal appearance of mass extinction back under the rubric of extrapolation, Darwin realizes that he does not have to deny episodes of markedly increased extinction entirely. Rather, he need only “spread out” the appearance of true simultaneity into a period long enough to permit explana­tion by biotic competition, perhaps intensified by tough physical times that make organismal battles even more stringent than usual, while remaining within the ordinary range and mode. After all, and in the anachronism of modern slang, “when the going gets tough, the tough get going.”

Thus, high rates of change in physical environments, so long as they stay within permissible uniformitarian limits, will enhance extinction by “turning up the gain” on the dial of input from the geological stage. But, to emphasize the key point of Darwin's efforts, a world of conceptual difference separates a false appearance of catastrophe that can, by invoking the imperfection of geological records, be spread over sufficient time to remain within the uni­formitarian range (leading to intensification of evolutionary rates by ordinary modes), and a true catastrophe that must impose its burden of extinction by direct environmental impress under rules different from those regulating the primarily biotic competition of normal times and ordinary ecology (and gen­erating a macroevolutionary vector of progress as a result). Darwin would therefore turn to his old standby of an imperfect geological record to disperse this third and greatest challenge to his extrapolationist vision.

Darwin presents two basic arguments — the first more theoretical and bio­logical, and the second far more practical, crucial, operational and geologi­cal — to buttress his claim that a threatening appearance of simultaneity in mass extinction and origination should be “spread out” to occupy enough time for explanation on uniformitarian premises by the ordinary operation of natural selection. First, theory dictates that old species generally become ex­tinct by biotic competition with new and improved forms, not by direct ex­tirpation through marked changes in the physical environment. “The extinc­tion of old forms is the almost inevitable consequence of the production of new forms” (p. 343). Darwin even denies a possible “escape route” for the less fit by asserting that mean global diversity has remained fairly constant through time — so the poorly adapted must go to the wall in clearing limited space for improved forms, and cannot hang on at the peripheries of a gen­eral expansion that welcomes the new without necessarily destroying the old: “Thus the appearance of new forms and the disappearance of old forms, both natural and artificial, are bound together . . . We know that the num­ber of species has not gone on indefinitely increasing, at least during the later geological periods, so that looking to later times we may believe that the production of new forms has caused the extinction of about the same number of old forms” (p. 320). Moreover, to enhance the implausibility of truly catastrophic mass dying, Darwin holds that “the complete extinction of the species of a group is generally a slower process than their production” (p. 318).

In a long discussion on pages 325-327, Darwin collates all aspects of his biological argument that ordinary competition will explain the literal appear­ance of simultaneous global extinction and origination. The final paragraph summarizes his extrapolationist convictions (p. 327):

Thus, as it seems to me, the parallel, and, taken in a large sense, simul­taneous, succession of the same forms of life throughout the world, accords well with the principle of new species having been formed by dominant species spreading widely and varying; the new species thus produced being themselves dominant owing to inheritance, and to hav­ing already had some advantage over their parents or over other species; these again spreading, varying, and producing new species. The forms which are beaten and which yield their places to the new and victorious forms, will generally be allied in groups, from inheriting some inferiority in common; and therefore as new and improved groups spread through­out the world, old groups will disappear from the world; and the succes­sion of forms in both ways will everywhere tend to correspond.



But Darwin's success hinges upon the second and more important geologi­cal argument — for his biological rationale only presents a theoretical defense, whereas he must overturn a strong signal from a literal reading of the fossil record: the appearance of true global simultaneity in mass extinction of entire groups and faunas, at a rate far too fast for any biological mechanism based on ordinary competition. At this crux, Darwin calls upon his standard argu­ment from imperfection to “spread out” this apparent moment into sufficient time for uniformitarian explanation.

Darwin admits the literal signal (p. 322): “Scarcely any paleontological discovery is more striking than the fact, that the forms of life change almost simultaneously throughout the world.” But this impression must be an artifact produced by the markedly incomplete preservation of more gradual and con­tinuous change in a woefully imperfect geological record (pp. 317-318): “The old notion of all the inhabitants of the earth having been swept away at successive periods by catastrophes is very generally given up, even by those geologists . . . whose general views would naturally lead them to this conclu­sion. On the contrary, we have every reason to believe, from the study of the tertiary formations, that species and groups of species gradually disappear, one after the other, first from one spot, then from another, and finally from the world.”

Among the many relevant aspects of imperfection, Darwin stresses two systematic factors that can compress a gradual transformation into a false appearance of simultaneity. First, sediments do not accumulate continuously, even in stratigraphic successions that look complete and uninterrupted. Strata pile up in continuity only when their basin of deposition slowly sub­sides, and this geological situation can occupy only a small percentage of to­tal time. Thus, most intervals will generate no sediments at all, and a group slowly petering out to extinction may seem to disappear all at once because sedimentation ceased when the group still included several declining species. If strata didn't begin to accumulate again until much later, all these species may have slowly dribbled out of existence during the intervening period of nondeposition: “We do not make due allowance for the enormous intervals of time, which have probably elapsed between our consecutive formations — longer perhaps in some cases than the time required for the accumulation of each formation. These intervals will have given time for the multiplication of species from some one or some few parent-forms; and in the succeeding for­mation such species will appear as if suddenly created” (pp. 302-303).

The second, and more sophisticated, argument follows from this principle of non-deposition during most intervals. We fall, Darwin argues, into circular reasoning in claiming that similar events in widely separated regions must have occurred simultaneously — for we make our judgment of temporal coin­cidence from the geological similarity alone, and not from any independent measure of time. For example, if we note the disappearance of several brachiopods in one stratum and the first appearance of several clams in the stratum just above, and we find the same pattern in a distant region on the other side of the earth, we might be tempted to proclaim a truly momentary wipeout followed by effectively simultaneous origin of functionally similar creatures. But this transition might actually occur very slowly in any single place, and leave no record of its true pace because a long interval of nondeposition fol­lowed the last preserved stratum of brachiopods. Moreover, this truly slow transition, prompted by ordinary biological competition of superior clams against inferior brachiopods, one species at a time, might have unfolded at quite different times in separated regions of the globe — for the process can only begin when the clam fauna migrates to a new area, and these migrations may span a considerable range of time (falsely compressed to simultaneity by our error in viewing the first stratum with clams as coeval throughout the world). Darwin summarizes this complex argument (pp. 327-329):

Therefore as new and improved groups spread throughout the world, old groups will disappear from the world; and the succession of forms in both ways will everywhere tend to correspond ... If the several forma­tions in these regions have not been deposited during the same exact pe­riod, — a formation in one region often corresponding with a blank inter­val in the other ... in this case, the several formations in the two regions could be arranged in the same order, in accordance with the general succession of the form of life, and the order would appear to be strictly parallel.



In a striking example, summarizing both the biological argument for grad­ual replacement by competition and the geological claim for false appearance of simultaneity by imperfection of preserved records, Darwin makes his plau­sible case for extrapolation and uniformitarian explanation, even for the two most famous cases of mass extinction for formerly prominent groups (see pp. 1314–1316 for a modern perspective on the demise of these taxa): trilobites at the Permo-Triassic event, and ammonites at the Cretaceous-Tertiary mass dying (pp. 321-322):

With respect to the apparently sudden extermination of whole families or orders, as of Trilobites at the close of the Paleozoic period and of Ammonites at the close of the secondary period, we must remember what has been already said on the probable wide intervals of time be­tween our consecutive formations; and in these intervals there may have been much slow extermination. Moreover, when by sudden immigration or by unusually rapid development, many species of a new group have taken possession of a new area, they will have exterminated in a corre­spondingly rapid manner many of the old inhabitants; and the forms which thus yield their places will commonly be allied, for they will par­take of some inferiority in common. Thus, as it seems to me, the manner in which single species and whole groups of species become extinct, ac­cords well with the theory of natural selection.



I have discussed Darwin's defense of uniformitarian extrapolation in detail because his argument, in this case, proved so successful in directing more than a century of research away from any consideration of truly catastrophic mass extinction, and towards a virtually unchallenged effort to spread the deaths over sufficient time to warrant an ordinary gradualistic explanation in conventional Darwinian terms, with any environmentally triggered accelera­tion of rate only serving to intensify the effects of ordinary competition, spe­cies by species. I can't think of any other prominent subject in paleontology where uniformitarian presuppositions clamped such a tight and efficient lid upon any consideration of empirically legitimate and conceptually plausible catastrophic scenarios. Merely to suggest such a thing (as even so prominent a scientist as Schindewolf, 1963, discovered) was to commit an almost risible apostasy.

In particular, these uniformitarian assumptions about the extended dura­tion of apparent mass extinctions led geologists and paleontologists to favor earth-based rather than cosmic physical inputs (for most plausible extrater­restrial causes work with greater speed and intensity), and to focus upon tel­luric influences (like changing climates and sea levels) that could most easily be rendered as gradualistic in style. So strongly entrenched did this prejudice remain, even spilling over into popular culture as well, that a few years after Alvarez et al. (1980) published their plausible, and by then increasingly well affirmed, scenario of extraterrestrial impact as a catastrophic trigger for the Cretaceous-Tertiary event, the New York Times even ridiculed the idea in their editorial pages, proclaiming (April 2, 1985) that “terrestrial events, like volcanic activity or changes in climate or sea level, are the most immediate possible causes of mass extinctions. Astronomers should leave to astrologers the task of seeking the cause of earthly events in the stars.”*

Thus, for example, when Gilluly (1949) published one of the most famous and influential geological papers of the mid-twentieth century, arguing that one popular physical theory for mass extinction — episodes of orogeny, or mountain building — could not be construed as either global in effect or si­multaneous in occurrence on all continents, but should rather be interpreted as sequences of more limited local events liberally spread out in time, he ended his paper with a stirring manifesto: “Long live Charles Lyell and his doctrine of uniformitarianism!” And, if I may cite an embarrassing incident from my own graduate career, when my mentor Norman Newell decided to invest considerable effort in compiling data from faunal lists in the world's paleontological literature to see if the maligned and effectively abandoned theme of mass extinction held any validity, I thought that the old man had taken leave of his good scientific sense in wasting so much time on a truly set­tled issue. For didn't we all know that the extinctions really spanned consid­erable intervals of time, and that any blip detected from faunal lists could only be recording an artifact of longer periods artificially compressed into si­multaneity by imperfections of the fossil record?

Only with this understanding of the historical impact and persistence of Darwin's uniformitarian and extrapolationist view of extinction in the fossil record can we grasp the conceptual reforming power (and not merely the phenomenological fascination) of the improving case — from a wild idea re­jected out of hand by nearly all paleontologists in 1980, to a firmly docu­mented virtual fact of nature by 2000 — for the triggering of at least one mass extinction, the Cretaceous-Tertiary event, by impact of a large extraterrestrial object (see Alvarez et al., 1980, for the original proposal, and Glen, 1994, for history of science in progress in a book entitled: The Mass Extinction De­bates: How Science Works in a Crisis).

Two comments on the K-T (Cretaceous-Tertiary) transition, one new and one old, may be taken as emblematic of the magnitude of both theoretical and practical reformulation. First, M. J. S. Rudwick, a prominent systematist of fossil brachiopods early in his career and the world's leading histo­rian of geology in later years, commented to Glen with the professional skills and “feel” of both segments of his ontogeny: “It never crossed my mind that . . . the brachiopod groups I worked with expired suddenly by modern K/T boundary standards. I thought that the brachs went out suddenly, but that 'suddenly'... in 1967 meant a few million years, which was considered geo­logically sudden” (quoted in Glen, 1994, p. 41).

Second, an argument prominently advanced by Charles Lyell himself dramatically illustrates the difference between strictly uniformitarian expecta­tions and the implications of truly catastrophic triggers for mass extinction. Lyell, as well known and recorded (see Gould, 1987b, for example), named the epochs of the Tertiary Era by a statistical method based on the percentage of molluscan species still extant — from Eocene (or “dawn of the recent” for the lowest percentage) to Pliocene (or “more of the recent” for the much higher percentages of later strata). He then noted that the uppermost Creta­ceous (Maastrichtian) and lowermost Tertiary beds held no species in com­mon at all. By his argument of statistical gradualism, this complete non-over­lap could only be explained by a vast gap of missing time — a period long enough to remove all Cretaceous species, one by one, at the same rate as the Tertiary demise. But since the entire Tertiary did not suffice to overturn the molluscan fauna completely (as a few Eocene species still survive), Lyell rea­soned that a globally unrecorded interval of time, longer than the full Tertiary span (so well represented by a voluminous paleontological record throughout the world), probably intervened between the latest Cretaceous and earliest Tertiary strata. As Lyell's hypothetical missing interval of more than 65 mil­lion years actually spans only a geological moment under the impact sce­nario, I would nominate Lyell's following statement (1833, p. 328) as the worst forecast ever made under the uniformitarian method of extrapolating from a range of observed rates!

There appears, then, to be a greater chasm between the organic remains of the Eocene and Maastricht beds, than between the Eocene and Recent strata; for there are some living shells in the Eocene formations, while there are no Eocene fossils in the newest secondary [that is, Maastricht­ian or uppermost Cretaceous] group. It is not improbable that a greater interval of time may be indicated by this greater dissimilarity in fossil re­mains ... We may, perhaps, hereafter detect an equal, or even greater se­ries, intermediate between the Maastricht beds and the Eocene strata.



Despite the uniformitarian consensus from Darwin's time until the late 20th century, occasional scholars of high reputation continued to float cata­strophic proposals for the unresolved puzzle of mass extinctions that, despite the orthodox conviction about “spreading out” into missing geological time, never meshed well with gradualist presuppositions and continued, like the proverbial sore thumb, to stick out above a comfortable background. But, in fairness, we cannot blame geologists and paleontologists for rejecting these proposals because, to cite a familiar motto, extraordinary claims require ex­traordinary evidence — and these attempts to resuscitate catastrophism re­mained entirely speculative (or at least undocumented by anything beyond the basic data for mass extinction itself, an evidentiary source that had al­ready, to the satisfaction of an entire profession, been rendered consistent with uniformitarian presuppositions).

To cite the two most notable examples from the generation before Alvarez, Schindewolf (1963), in an article entitled “Neokatastrophismus,” proposed bursts of cosmic radiation as the paroxysmal mechanism of mass extinc­tion — with direct nuclear death (for the exterminations) and vast increases in mutation rates among survivors (for subsequent replacements by highly altered forms). But, to show the frustration (and scientific nonoperationality) of such proposals, Schindewolf actually stated — thus providing a favorite case that I have used for decades to illustrate the difference between science and speculation — that he had postulated cosmic radiation explicitly because such a cause would leave no empirical sign (then known to geologists) in the record of strata and fossils. (For Schindewolf had to admit that the empirical record revealed no direct evidence at all for a catastrophic mechanism of mass extinction, and he therefore had to seek a potential cause that would leave no testable sign of its operation! Can one possibly imagine an unhappier situa­tion for science? — to face the prospect of a plausible explanation that does not, in principle, leave evidence for its validation.)

In a second example, well remembered by paleontologists of my genera­tion, Digby McLaren used his presidential address to the Paleontological So­ciety in 1970 to hypothesize that a bolide impact had triggered the Devonian mass extinction. In the light of Alvarez's later triumph with a similar explana­tion for the K-T event, one might be tempted to view this address as pro­phetic. But, much as I admire both Digby himself and iconoclasts in general, I'm sure McLaren would admit that he simply “lucked out” in this case. For, like Schindewolf, McLaren could present no evidence at all for his bolide, and simply slipped this proposal into the end of his talk in an almost apologetic manner, after documenting the style and extent of the extinction itself (the main focus of his paper). (Moreover, to this day and despite excellent evidence for bolide triggering of the K-T event, we have no satisfactory expla­nation of the Devonian extinction, and no credible data for its causation by impact.)

By contrast, the genesis of the Alvarez's hypothesis for the K-T mass extinc­tion could not have been more different, or more exemplary for science. For the K-T bolide proposal began with an unanticipated empirical discovery — generated, ironically, during a test for an opposite hypothesis, and therefore surely not gathered under the aegis of any iconoclastic theoretical thoughts. Geologist Walter Alvarez, trying to test an idea about latest Cretaceous sedi­mentation rates under traditional gradualist views of the extinction, asked his father, the Nobel laureate in physics Luis Alvarez, whether any isotopic signa­ture might provide evidence for the following conjecture: Walter wondered whether a false appearance of rapidity in extinction might arise from an un­usual slowdown in sedimentation rates, thereby compressing a “standard” amount of extinction into an unusually short stratigraphic interval.

Luis proposed a measurement or iridium, an element virtually absent from the earth's indigenous surficial rocks. (Presumably, the earth formed with iridium at standard cosmic abundance, but this indigenous iridium, as such a heavy and unreactive element, quickly sank well below the surface, especially since the earth's crust was effectively molten early in the planet's history.) Luis therefore supposed that throughout Phanerozoic time, iridium has en­tered the earth's surface only through cosmic influx, and at the effectively constant rate of uniformitarian assumptions — the “gentle cosmic rain from heaven” in radiation and tiny particles, as standard views and terminology then held. Luis reasoned that Walter's hypothesis could therefore be tested by measuring iridium concentrations in latest Cretaceous sediments, arguing that a small positive excursion would validate Walter's supposition, as the constant cosmic influx became diluted by less than the usual amount of iridium-free terrestrial sediment.

But when the Alvarez team measured iridium in boundary-layer sediments, they found a value so high that they had to invert their initial assumption in the most radical manner. Terrestrial sedimentation would have to cease for longer than the earth's entire history to produce such a high spike from a low and constant cosmic influx. Rather, they now reasoned, a true and sudden in­flux of iridium must have occurred right at the K-T boundary itself — with the obvious “culprit” as a large extraterrestrial body striking the earth and im-placing an enormous and momentary dose of cosmic iridium. Thus, the re­vival of catastrophic theories for mass extinction began with an empirical surprise generated during a test for a conventional gradualistic hypothesis — the exact opposite (in both form and utility) of previous exercises in evidence-free and catastrophically driven speculation.

This thoroughly different character of the Alvarez hypothesis — as an evi­dence-driven claim bursting with seeds of testability, rather than a sterile speculation — should have caught the attention and intrigue of all scientists from the start. But the anti-catastrophic biases of Lyellian and Darwinian tra­ditions ran so deep, and the knee-jerk fear and disdain of paleontologists therefore stood so high, that even this welcome novelty of operationality did not allay rejection and outright disdain from nearly all established profes­sional students of the fossil record (whereas other relevant subdisciplines with other traditions, planetary scientists and students of the physics and en­gineering of impacts, for example, reacted in markedly more mixed or posi­tive ways — see Glen, 1994). I will never forget a 1979 phone conversation (as the preprints of Alvarez et al., 1980, circulated) with David Raup, perhaps the only other invertebrate paleontologist of my generation who reacted with initial warmth to the impact hypothesis:* It was one of those laconic affairs, where no more need be said: Raup: “This time it's different you know.” Me, in reply: “Yes, of course, the iridium.”

In the retrospect of a mere twenty years between initial proposal and such substantial success (although by no means total, in either its own hopes or terms), we may identify several reasons to honor the conventional criteria used by scientists to judge the strength and importance of hypotheses — crite­ria based on empirical affirmation, fruitful extension, and widening intellec­tual scope, rather than on such nonoperational notions as progress towards absolute truth. Science is, as P. B. Medawar stated in the title to his finest book, the Art of the Soluble:

1. At their initial decision to publish, the Alvarezes had detected an iridium spike only at two nearby localities in Denmark and Italy, and couldn't even be confident in their theory's crucial prediction of a worldwide enhancement. (Fortunately for them, evidence for a third and virtually antipodal spike from New Zealand arrived in time for inclusion in the original publication.) But, within a decade, affirmation had accumulated from so many collateral sources — all independent of, and unpredictable from, the iridium spike it­self — that the case for impact had effectively been sealed. These additions ranged from shocked quartz in the K-T boundary layer throughout the world (with silica tetrahedra arranged in an unusual manner only associated, so far as we know, with high pressures of impact, including the initial discovery of such forms in nuclear bomb craters), to the “smoking gun” of a gigantic crater of exactly appropriate age — the Chicxulub structure off the Yucatan peninsula in Mexico. As this evidence accumulated, the alternative volcanist scenario (with iridium recruited from the earth's interior in extrusive events of a magnitude never witnessed in historical times), which had provided such good material for fruitful debate, yielded the floor (although volcanic action initiated by impact may have played an important role in the full scenario of explanation for mass extinctions). Needless to say, other exciting hypotheses generated by the impact debate — particularly Raup and Sepkoski's claim for a 26 million year periodicity in extinction, with a subsequent set of wondrous astronomical hypotheses as potential explanations, including the actions of a previously unknown dwarf companion star to the sun — have not fared so well (although a few jurors, with a few good arguments, are still holding out).

2. Enhanced and surprising interdisciplinary communication offers no guarantee of scientific rectitude or success, but we can only celebrate the veri­table orgy of exciting, and at least intellectually fruitful, discussion and col­laboration inspired by the impact hypothesis among scientists in subdisciplines that had never read each other's work, hardly even knew the names of the most reputable leaders in the disparate domains, and could barely speak the same scientific language (most notably of Linnaean Latin vs. Newtonian triple integral signs). Paleontologists met, and even eventually published pa­pers with, colleagues who had formerly received little more than a grunted “hello” in 20 years of hallway passing, or who had only been seen as strang­ers across a crowded room during some unenchanted evening at a faculty party. The several Snowbird conferences in Utah will never be forgotten by anyone who enjoyed the privilege of attendance, and who participated in the warm fellowship, and sometimes-antic debate, with (among many others) nu­clear physicists, taxonomic paleontologists, and historians of science.

3. Most importantly, and diagnostically for scientific practice, the impact hypothesis proved its mettle (at least for me) in the explicit suggestions and prods that it provided for particular (and ultimately highly fruitful and excit­ing) paleontological research that would never even have been conceptualized without its nudge and encouragement. I have argued throughout this book that the broad world-views of scientists (with gradualism, uniformitarianism, and strict Darwinian adaptationism as the major examples in this context) do not merely act as passive summaries of general beliefs, but serve as active definers of permissible subjects for study, and modes for their examination. At best, a potent context continually provokes more fruitful work. But at worst, and (unfortunately) ever so often in the history of science, such world-views direct and constrain research by actively defining out of existence, or simply placing outside the realm of conceptualization, a large set of interesting sub­jects and approaches, often including the very classes of data best suited to act as potential refutations of the world-view. Such self-referential affirma­tions are not promoted cynically, or (for the most part) even consciously, but they do, nonetheless, operate as strong impediments to scientific change.

As argued throughout Chapter 9, my greatest pride in punctuated equilib­rium lies in the theoretical space it created for active study of subjects that could win neither definition nor existence under gradualistic presuppositions: particularly stasis (previously viewed as an embarrassing failure to detect evolution, and therefore as a non-subject), now generally seen as an impor­tant and surprising result at several levels in the history of life; and the punctuational explanation of trends by differential success of species treated as discrete Darwinian individuals (an alternative with explanatory options that simply didn't exist under older models of trends defined exclusively as anagenetic transformation). In several similar ways — I will cite just two here — the catastrophic impact hypothesis of mass extinction created an en­larged intellectual space that forced paleontologists to reevaluate data once viewed as comfortably consistent with gradualist assumptions, but clearly subject to extension and better definition as tests for gradualism vs. catastro­phe. In this vital way, self-fulfilling claims for convention became sources for discrimination among rival hypotheses about some of the most important questions in the history of life.

For example, in a justly influential paper, Signor and Lipps (1982) recog­nized that the well-documented literal signal of taxa slowly “petering out” in the stratigraphic record before a mass extinction boundary might actually be consistent with truly catastrophic removal — a “counterintuitive,” but ac­tually rather obvious, option that paleontologists had never conceptualized because the literal signal matched their expectations, and they therefore never questioned the meaning. Signor and Lipps argued that if all taxa under con­sideration had truly died at once, their recorded disappearance in the stratigraphic record would still be sequential, as based on probability of fossilization. After all, a top, large-bodied carnivore like Tyrannosaurus, with a local geographic range and a relatively small N, might only yield a fossil once every several meters during the stratigraphic range of its actual existence; whereas a foraminifer that lived as billions of individuals at every moment of a continu­ous oceanic core, should provide abundant specimens in every mm of its stratigraphic existence. Thus, even if the dinosaur and the foram species died at the same instant in a worldwide catastrophe, the last dinosaur fossil might still appear several meters below the extinction boundary, while foram fossils should persist to the last stratum.

This artifactual pattern, now appropriately named the Signor-Lipps effect, can be distinguished from a genuine petering out that truly gradual extinction would produce — most obviously by testing for correlations between time of disappearance before the boundary and expectations of preservability in the fossil record (as measured by “waiting time” between fossils in normal strata between extinction events, not by working with abundances near the bound­ary itself, where circular reasoning may so easily intervene). Regardless of the outcome in any particular application — and some studies have yielded consis­tency with Signor-Lipps, whereas others seem to show genuine petering out — paleontologists had never formulated, or even conceptualized, this important methodology until the catastrophic impact scenario forced their attention to such questions.

As a different approach to the same basic situation, one might decide in­stead to take a group long interpreted as showing a clear literal signal of pe­tering out — and then go to the most promising stratigraphic record in the world, pulling apart every single bedding plane to see if surpassingly rare specimens might occur nearer, if not right up to, the extinction boundary (for you only need one to disprove complete extinction). This “needle (or dino­saur) in the haystack” strategy represents the “flip-side” of the Signor-Lipps approach to the general problem of sampling in science — either use a global and statistical method to extract a clear signal from broad data, or sample with such intensity in a more limited area that you can effectively survey the available “universe,” and no longer even require the art of statistical infer­ence. But why would one even think of sampling with such intensity, absent the prod of the impact hypothesis and its prediction of putative success. After all, if your world-view enjoins petering out, and your data (read literally) clearly display just such a pattern, why would you petition the National Sci­ence Foundation for cash, and then spend several summers sweating in a desert, pulling apart every bedding plane in a single place virtually guaran­teed to yield nothing. Such behavior could only point to an unsound mind — unless, of course, you had a really good reason to believe that a diamond lay hidden somewhere in that particular stratigraphic haystack.

This method of hyperintense sampling in optimal places has been applied, with great success in validating substantial, even fully maintained, abundance right up to the K-T boundary itself for two groups whose ostensible petering out had provided a mainstay of empirically based opposition to catastrophic mass extinction — ammonites as affirmed by Peter Ward's work in France and Spain (Ward, 1992), and dinosaurs as indicated by collections of Sheehan et al. (1991) in Montana and North Dakota. Seek and (perhaps) ye shall find, but in a real world of such limited time and opportunity in scientific careers, one does need a theoretical license, as well as a landowner's specific permis­sion, to seek.

Despite my personal excitement at the theoretical and practical import of the impact hypothesis, I must confess my initial surprise at a statement that historian of science Bill Glen made to me in the early 1990's. For he asserted that the reforming power of the impact theory would surpass even that of Plate Tectonics in the history of geology. (And one cannot accuse Glen either of sour grapes or parochialism, for he not only wrote the book on “living” history of science for the impact debate (Glen, 1994), but had previously written an even more highly acclaimed history in progress for plate tectonics as well (Glen, 1982). Now I still don't fully agree with Glen, if only for two primary reasons:

First, despite all its successes in 20 years, the Alvarez scenario still applies, with proven power, only to the single event of the K-T mass extinction. None of the other four great mass dyings show clear iridium spikes or other evi­dence for triggering by impact (although some of the smaller extinction events have been more plausibly linked to possible impact). Thus, the Alvarez scenario remains a historical explanation, however elegantly affirmed, for a single event, and not a general theory of mass extinction. (And, as I came to know and understand Luis Alvarez late in his life, I rather suspect that this situation would have frustrated him intensely, for, as a theoretical physicist by trade, he remained committed to the view that science can only attain its true goal by establishing general explanations rooted in the spatio-temporal in-variance of natural law. To learn that he had become godfather to the contin­gent explanation of a great event, and not to the formulation of a general the­ory of mass extinction, would have left him unamused.)

Second, even though we now have confidence in the factuality of impact as a trigger for the K-T extinction, we still cannot specify a satisfactory “killing scenario” to explain the timing and differential susceptibility to dying among life's various taxa — a scarcely surprising circumstance, given the complexity of the event and the potential number of dire consequences that impact might unleash, but still a damper upon any feeling of full satisfaction. Indeed, I re­main amused by how the competing (and, to be sure, partly complementary) ideas follow the canonical scenarios for disaster in Western culture — the ten plagues of Moses. And whenever our scientific preferences so clearly match our culturally inherited stories, we should begin to question the complex in­tellectual and psychological bases of the hypotheses we have chosen to test.

Moses tried them all (and eventually triumphed, of course). For the most popular theme of “nuclear winter” and the cutting off of light (and photosyn­thesis) by a persisting worldwide dust cloud raised by the impact, “he sent a thick darkness over all the land, even darkness which might be felt.” For acid rain and worldwide fires, “he gave them hailstones for rain; fire mingled with the hail ran along upon the ground.” For poisoning of the oceans, “he turned their water into blood.” For killing plagues induced by the few successful sur­vivors, “their land brought forth frogs, yea even unto their King's chambers.” And for selective diseases unleashed in this novel environment, we have the analog of Moses' ultimate weapon: “He smote all the firstborn of Egypt, the chief of all their strength.”

Nonetheless, I do appreciate the undeniably valid part of Glen's conten­tion. For many scientists and historians have noted that, whereas plate tec­tonics changed our view of the earth's structure more profoundly than any previous theory had ever done — and may even be described as supplying our first adequate account for the physics of earth-sized bodies in general — plate tectonics also, albeit ironically, promulgated a conservative reform in not challenging in the slightest way, but rather supplying a mechanism to vali­date, the deepest of all geological presuppositions: uniformitarianism itself. For if the earth's largest mountains can rise as a result of two plates crunching together at their characteristic moving rate of millimeters per year, and if the great faultlines, earthquakes and volcanic provinces also mark the edges of such slowly drifting plates, then the central Lyellian dictum of explaining all grand, and all apparently quick, events by the accumulation of slow move­ments, utterly imperceptible at the scale of our daily lives, gains a kind of planetary and mathematical validity that can only be deemed awesome in its phenomenological range and intellectual reach.

On the other hand, Glen continued, the impact theory — even if we never succeed in establishing this mechanism as a general theory, and even if such catastrophes remain confined to explanations of particular events — directly fractured Lyellian uniformity, therefore penetrating far deeper in its iconoclasm than the admittedly more comprehensive theory of plate tectonics could ever bore. In any case, and in the terms and concerns of this book, the validation of a truly catastrophic triggering mechanism for at least some events of mass extinction dramatically fractured the support that Darwin needed from the kind of geological stage necessarily set for playing out his preferred game of life. The vital extrapolationist premise of the third leg on the tripod of essential Darwinian logic must fail if global paroxysm can undo, redirect, or even substantially impact a pattern of life's history that, in a fully Darwinian scheme of explanation, must scale up in full continuity from the microevolutionary realities of competition in observable ecological time.

I have, in my own writings, tried to summarize the theoretical importance of readmitting truly catastrophic scenarios of mass extinction back into scientific respectability (after 150 years of successful Lyellian anathematization) by stating an emerging consensus about four crucial and general features of such events, each strongly negative (and, in their ensemble, probably fatal) for the key extrapolationist premise needed to maintain a claim of exclusivity for a strictly Darwinian theory of evolutionary process (with descriptive aspects of life's pageant still left for paleontological documentation, because a gen­eral theory must underpredict an actual outcome in a historically contingent world): mass extinctions are more frequent, more rapid, more intense, and more different in their effects than paleontologists had suspected, and that Lyellian geology and Darwinian biology could permit.

In terms of the broad categories of pattern in life's history that will now require at least partial explanation from catastrophic theories of mass extinc­tion, and will probably not be rendered on Darwinian assumptions of extrap­olation from microevolutionary theory,* I would summarize the most important changes under two rubrics: the “random” and the “different rules” models for alternating regimes of faunal turnover in mass extinction vs. ordi­nary, sequential (and, in Darwin's own preferences, overtly competitive) re­placement in “normal” times between these infrequent but intense episodes.

In the purely random model, which I do not consider of great importance in life's history, a group might die in a mass extinction for no reason of partic­ular sensitivity towards the catastrophic agents of extermination, but for rea­sons little beyond the luck of the draw — the “bad luck” vs. the traditional “bad genes” in Raup's amusing characterization (Raup, 1991a). (I consider this random model as less important than deterministic reactions to the “dif­ferent rules” of these parlous times because, even in these extreme episodes, the species number of major taxa generally remains large enough to preclude full removal by random inclusion of all members of one kind within a per­centage of totality. All ten red beans in a bag of 100 may disappear often enough in a random destruction of 75 beans. But we would not expect all 10,000-dinosaur species in a fauna of 100,000 land taxa to die in a truly ran­dom reduction to 25,000 taxa.)

Nonetheless, a fact of the fossil record, not widely known or appreciated outside the community of professional paleontologists, may grant the ran­dom model an important role in a few crucial circumstances during life's history (and such moments make all the difference in contingent sequences, as Jimmy Stewart discovered when his guardian angel showed him the al­ternate history of his town, absent his existence, in It's A Wonderful Life): some groups, formerly dominant in their habitats and therefore viewed as persistently “major” in our conceptions, fluctuated enormously in diversity throughout geological time, and just happened to be surviving at very low N (a situation from which they had always rebounded before, and in normal times) when a mass extinction intervened. And when an event of latest Perm­ian magnitude occurs — the largest of all mass dyings, with estimates of spe­cies loss ranging up to 96 percent (see Raup, 1992) — and your group contrib­utes only a lineage or two to the global fauna, you can easily disappear, entirely and forever, for little reason beyond bad luck (those two red beans, both included among the 96 percent of dead benthic taxa, but entirely equiv­alent in ordinary Darwinian prowess to the 4 percent that survived).

Among several plausible cases in this mode, the two specifically cited by Darwin (see p. 1302) to express his confidence in gradualistic and uniformitarian models — trilobites and ammonites as the “signatures” of the Permian and Cretaceous extinctions respectively — may, ironically, fit this potential scenario best. Trilobites abounded in most Paleozoic faunas (at least in the af­fections of fossil collectors), but they had been reduced to only two lineages of low diversity by latest Permian times. The death of these two, and the con­sequent termination of one among only four great arthropod classes, may reveal no insufficiency of trilobite anatomy, ecology or development, and may only record the failure of any among a very few coins to come up heads at a weird moment that diverted 96 percent of all flips into a tailspin towards oblivion.

The case of ammonites is both more complex and more instructive. They suffered greatly during the last three of five great Phanerozoic dyings — lat­est Permian, latest Triassic, and latest Cretaceous. They barely survived the first two, with only one or two lineages persisting in each case, and then died entirely in the K-T event (although their less speciose relatives, the cham­bered nautiloids, survived to this day to become favored items in aquariums and shell collections, and to become, as the “ship of pearl,” Oliver Wendell Holmes's celebrated metaphor of eternity: “Build thee more stately mansions, O my soul...”).

After the first two restrictions, the ammonites reradiated mightily and be­came major components of Triassic, and then of Jurassic-Cretaceous, faunas. Perhaps we do need an “ammonite-specific” reason for the final Cretaceous death, as Ward has shown (1992) that their latest Maastrichtian diversity re­mained respectable. But I raise a different point here: Can we specify any “real” mathematical or biological difference among reduction to 1, 2 or 0 lin­eages? That is, can we say that the Cretaceous extinction was causally worse for ammonites than the preceding Permian or Triassic events? Surely not from the numbers themselves (and we have no other basis for such an assertion, at least at this moment of research and understanding). We can state no causal or statistical difference among 0, 1 or 2 survivors. These results are effectively equivalent. We might as well put slips with the three numbers in a bag and let nature choose one at random for each of the last three mass extinctions. And yet, in a real world of genealogical history, zero vs. anything else makes all the difference in the universe: absolute termination absolutely forever, vs. the possibility of redemption and reassertion. In this sense as well, and again in a sequence so influenced by contingency, effectively random removal based on small numbers in the face of catastrophe can impact the history of life in truly fateful and permanent ways. Principles regulate ranges of events, but particu­lar and unpredictable events make history.

Nonetheless, I am confident, and I think nearly all paleontologists would agree, that the “different rules” model — a more conventionally causal view of history — plays a far more important role in expressing the power of cata­strophic mass extinction to fracture the crucial extrapolationist premise of Darwinian central logic. I devoted the first part of this section (pp. 1296–1303) to Darwin's own emphasis on the importance of “spreading out” the timing of apparent “mass extinction” into sufficient spans for explanation by ordinary Darwinian competition, with sequential and individual deaths of species occurring in conventional realms of natural selection, at most against a background of unusual environmental perturbation that may “turn up the gain” of intensity for standard causes, but will not change the usual rules or reasons. I also showed, in particular, how Darwin needed this extrapolationist argument to validate a concept of progress through life's history that his cultural context demanded (and to which he personally assented), but that he recognized (and, in his philosophical radicalism, greatly appreciated) as underivable from the “pure” operation of natural selection, and therefore re­coverable only by an additional ecological postulate about the predominance of biotic competition in a perpetually crowded biota (the “metaphor of the wedge”).

The key phenomenon for this entire discussion — whether explanation be offered by Darwinian extrapolation, or by the random or different rules alter­natives — has always resided in the observed selectivity of mass extinctions: why do some taxa flourish and others die, especially since the observed pat­terns of mass extinctions do not simply intensify the tendencies of normal times (that is, mass dyings do not preferentially remove those groups already on the wane by competition with superior forms during “background” times. Mammals were not expanding, with dinosaur retreating, during the long span of Cretacous life).

Under the “different rules” model, extirpated groups die for definable rea­sons of conventional anatomy, physiology, behavior, or population structure. But their death follows from the unpredictable, and suddenly instituted, “dif­ferent rules” of catastrophically altered environments in episodes of mass ex­tinction, and does not occur because these taxa had evolved properties that would have doomed them in the same manner (albeit more slowly and se­quentially) for ordinary reasons of Darwinian competition during normal times. In fact, and even worse for conventional arguments about progress, the traits that spell doom in catastrophically altered circumstances may just as well have originated as the adaptive features that secured success, and com­petitive superiority in the normal Darwinian times just preceding. In this important sense, if the previous Darwinian “best” often die for unpredictable but deterministic reasons in the suddenly altered worlds of catastrophic mass extinction, then Darwin's crucial argument for progress (always weak and suspect because it could not flow from the abstract logic of natural selection itself, and required an additional ecological belief in plenitude and biotic struggle) collapses through the disruption, or even the reversal of its vector, as imposed by these dramatic episodes with their different rules for who flour­ishes and who goes to the wall. And if these episodes are sufficiently numer­ous, profound, rapid and different (my four criteria of p. 1313), then their ac­cumulated impact may balance, or even reverse, the Darwinian accumulation during much longer stretches of normal times, thereby imbuing the full pattern of life's history with a very different form (perhaps entirely devoid of any meaningful vector of progress) than the extrapolationist premise of Darwin­ian central logic had assumed.

Thus, the influence of the “different rules” model in helping to explain the waxing and waning of taxa in macroevolution represents the most interest­ing and far-reaching modification of Darwinian expectations unleashed by catastrophism's renewed respectability, and by the resulting inadequacy of uniformitarian extrapolation from Darwinian microevolution to supply a full explanation for the causes of pattern in life's history. After all, and in admit­ted caricature, if the size of dinosaurs had marked their success over mam­mals in habitats of large terrestrial vertebrates for more than 130 million years; and if this established basis for Darwinian success then became an im­portant causal factor in their differential death, with small size as an equally vital reason for mammalian survival; then the tables truly turned with the in­stitution of these particular different rules of a K-T moment — as marks of failure (or at least of limitation) in the long background of Darwinian compe­tition became fortuitous substrates for survival, while the primary features of former and such prolonged domination became unalterable portents of doom (whether directly or, more probably, via such correlated consequences as gen­erally smaller population sizes and generally greater ecological specializa­tion). “How are the mighty fallen” exclaimed David in his famous lament (2 Samuel: l). But Goliath had died by David's superior wit (and good aim), whereas Saul expired as a consequence of his own madness. Dinosaurs, on the other hand, may have fallen by their might, but surely not by their fault.

Thus, for these good reasons, the paleontological literature on the biologi­cal implications of mass extinction has, for the past 20 years, rightly focused upon the documentation of “different rules” in such potentially catastrophic episodes, and on their impact upon pattern in the history of life. I cannot, in the context of this chapter, present a compendium of these ever increasing, and ever more sophisticated, studies. I shall therefore cite just a few of the early results that have already become classic in a burgeoning field. I should also at least acknowledge — to open up a real can of worms that I shall not even attempt to close — that, at least partly as a “back formation” from doubts inspired by the debate on mass extinction, the entire subject of the efficacy of competition, in normal times as well as in geological perspective, has fallen under increasing question (see Simberloff, 1983,1984 for some ex­plicitly microevolutionary doubts; Gould and Calloway, 1980, for a paleon­tological example; Benton, 1996, for a general argument from the fossil re­cord; but also Sepkoski, 1996, for a strong and more nuanced defense of competition in paleontologically normal times, and Sepkoski et al., 2000, for a beautifully documented and fascinating example, and Gould, 2000b, for commentary thereupon).

Jablonski published the most important early work on this subject, estab­lishing a methodology and terminology in his classic paper (Jablonski, 1986b) on “Background and mass extinctions: the alternation of macroevolutionary regimes.” Some of the specifically K-T patterns will strike no one as surprising, given the context; but the readjustment of diversity under such a pronounced moment of different rules still imposes a major signal upon the overall pattern of life's history. For example, land plants reproduc­ing by seeds, rhizomes, or any other mode of propagation by bodies that can lay dormant under soil, tended to survive at higher frequency (Wolfe, 1990). And Sheehan and Hansen (1986) found higher death rates among animals di­rectly linked in their feeding to a supply of living plants, whereas feeders on dead plant material, scavengers and detritivores tended to fare better.

Jablonski's studies break more general conceptual ground in their broader scope across several extinction events and in their search for commonalities across mass dyings rather than reactions to a specific impact scenario of the K-T event. He argues (in Jablonski and Bottjer, 1983, for example) that spe­cies-rich clades tend to increase in numbers of taxa during background times (largely by species selection within subclades whose species-individuals gen­erate relatively more daughters, and therefore already a macroevolutionary claim that cannot be extrapolated from Darwinian organismal selection). However, these species-rich clades then tend to fail differentially in mass ex­tinction because the same properties that enhance the capacity for speciation in background times — stenotopy and limited capacity for dispersal, for exam­ple — make taxa more susceptible to removal in catastrophic episodes.

In later extensions of the same theme, Jablonski (1986a, 1987) established the best-documented case of genuine clade selection in evolution (working contrary, or at least orthogonally, to species selection, and therefore atop the hierarchy of potential levels at an apex that, at least in my judgment, proba­bly operates only rarely in nature — see pp. 712–714 for further discussion). He found no consistent relationship between the properties of species within molluscan clades and the full clade's propensity for survival through mass ex­tinctions. However, the clade's entire geographic range (but not the individual ranges of its component species) correlated strongly and positively with survivorship through mass extinctions.

Jablonski (1996) then documented a further disconnect between microevolutionary expectations in extrapolation, and macroevolutionary realities. In his rich database of late Cretaceous mollusks, Jablonski could find no evi­dence for the most venerable of all supposed generalities in trending — Cope's rule, or the tendency of lineages to increase in body size (see pp. 902–905 for further discussion). Nonetheless, good microevolutionary reasons — and data — can be cited for claiming a general selective benefit for increased body size that should (ceteris paribus), in a Darwinian world of extrapolation, yield Cope's rule in macroevolutionary extension. The reasons for this extrapolationist failure may be formulated at several levels, including forces op­erating in background times as well. But one important factor also intervenes in the different rules of mass extinction, where susceptibility of clades “does not appear to have been size selective” (Jablonski, 1996, p. 279). Jablonski concludes, also citing his earlier work on geographic ranges (1996, p. 279): “Survivorship [in mass extinction] appears to have hinged on other factors such as broad geographic range, which shows little or no correlation with body size in marine invertebrates. The analyses presented here reinforce the view that macroevolutionary patterns need not be simple extensions of those seen at the level of individual organisms over microevolutionary time.”

I would also make the further observation that these discordances between background and mass rules (the “alternation” of regimes in Jablonski's termi­nology) must play a major role in the most general patterning of life's history, absent which the tree of earthly life would have grown in a markedly differ­ent shape. (In this most crucial sense, of course, I reassert the primary theme of this book that macroevolutionary theory matters profoundly.) For if differ­ent rules did not impose their signals at levels above microevolutionary ex­trapolation, the powerful themes of Darwin's world would push through to completion in life's phylogeny. For example, the species-rich clades of back­ground times, with their dual advantages in organismic and species-level se­lection, would eventually eliminate the species-poor clades entirely if a still higher-level component of advantage for at least some species-poor clades did not “kick in” during episodes of different rules in mass extinction. And if the general, albeit slight, statistical edge of larger body size scaled straight up from local populations to the global biota at geological scales, what would guarantee a world enriched with all the little shrews and hummingbirds of our delight, not to mention the continued existence of short people, including the author of this book.

These generalities enter the corpus of macroevolutionary theory, but the different rules of mass extinction must still work through the specificities of various causes that provoke the rare, but potent, catastrophes of planetary history (with impact at the K-T boundary as the only firmly established case so far). Thus, some of the most interesting, if hypothetical, invocations have been proposed as explanations for specific and otherwise puzzling results of the K-T event. I have long been intrigued, for example, by the striking pattern of differential extinction in the oceanic plankton — with 73 percent of coccolithophorid genera, 85 percent of radiolarians, and 92 percent of forams failing to survive, while diatoms suffered only a 23 percent loss of genera.

Kitchell, Clark and Gombos (1986) made the interesting argument, later supported by direct data of Griffis and Chapman (1988) on survivorship of phytoplankton in conditions of prolonged darkness, that the differential suc­cess of diatoms probably bears no relationship to any notion of cosmic “betterness” or general “progress,” but may only record the fortuity in exaptive use (under the different rules of K-T darkness) of adaptations evolved for or­dinary, short-term microevolutionary advantages in background times (and not, obviously, in anticipation of any additional edge in forthcoming catas­trophes!) Kitchell et al. (1986) argue that most diatom species have evolved mechanisms of dormancy (formation of resting spores, for example), permit­ting these photosynthetic organisms to survive extended periods of darkness, including several polar months per year for species living at high latitudes. Moreover, since diatoms build their skeletons of silica, which they can extract most readily in oceanic zones of, upwelling that can be uncertain in placement and impersistent in timing, the capacity to “shut down” for periods of dor­mancy between such favorable moments gains a second important adaptive value.

But these two reasons for dormancy — to survive seasonal periods of dark­ness at high latitudes and to “wait out” silica-poor times between episodes of upwelling — operate entirely in the microevolutionary world of ordinary Dar­winian selection. In this lucky case, these particular advantages did scale up to good fortune, given the factor favored by many researchers for the pri­mary agent of the K-T killing scenario — extended darkness from a global dust cloud generated by the impacting bolide and its excavated and elevated earthly products. Thus, in this hypothesis, the relative prosperity of diatoms vs. the relative destruction of forams and other planktonic groups arose by the fortuity of how key adaptations for background conditions happened to “play” in an unpredictable and utterly different world of catastrophic im­pact. These “different rules” happened to suit diatoms and spell disaster for forams.

And if diatoms prevailed by such good fortune, let us not forget a key rea­son behind the possibility of this most immediate interaction between me as writer and you as reader. Dinosaurs and mammals had shared the earth for more than 130 million years, fully double the subsequent period of mamma­lian success that led to the possibility of Homo sapiens among some 4000 other living species in our mammalian clade. If the data of Sheehan et al. (1991) hold, and dinosaurs did persist in respectable abundance right to the moment of impact, then we may reasonably conjecture that, absent this ulti­mate random bolt from the blue, dinosaurs would still dominate the habitats of large terrestrial vertebrates, and mammals would still be rat-size crea­tures living in the ecological interstices of their world. In this most vitally per­sonal of all cases, we really should thank our lucky stars that, at least in one cogent interpretation, certain marks of our ancestral incompetence — persis­tently small size in a dinosaurian world, for example — suddenly turned into a crucial and fortuitous advantage under the different rules of K-T impact, while the former source of triumph for dinosaurs may have spelled their doom under these same newly imposed rules. To be sure, this speculative sce­nario only references a particular event, and its much later impact upon the possibility of origin for one odd species. Yes, of course, we seek general the­ory as the goal of science, not the explanation of such odd particulars. But this tale, above all, happens to be our particular, and the most precious source of our possibility. Enough said.





THE PARADOX OF THE FIRST TIER: TOWARDS A GENERAL

THEORY OF TIERS OF TIME





Although I have tried to present a critical exegesis of both the sources and the logic of Darwin's argument for general progress as a broad statistical and ac­cumulating consequence of biotic competition in a crowded world, I must also confess that Darwin's rationale and development seem basically sound to me. And yet, I do not think that the actual history of life maps the expecta­tions of his argument, thus leaving us with a central evolutionary paradox. Nearly all-vernacular understanding of evolution, and much professional in­terpretation as well, would deny my last statement and affirm a broad signal of such progress. Although I do appreciate the appeal of an argument based on “ratcheting” for an accretion of levels in complexity through time — for certain kinds of more elaborate aggregation and integration cannot viably disassemble once conjoined, although any level can be lost by extinction (my interpretation of the claims presented by Maynard Smith and Szathmary, 1995, for “the major transitions in evolution”) — I fail to find any rationale beyond anthropocentric hope and social tradition for viewing such a se­quence as a fundamental signal, or an expression of the main weights and tendencies in life's history. After all, two of the three great boughs on life's phyletic tree remain prokaryotic, while all three multicellular kingdoms ex­tend as twigs from the terminus of the third bough. If we regard intellectual skepticism against anthropocentrism as a worthy cause, I don't see how we can deny that the persisting domination, and continued rosy prospects, of prokaryotes epitomize the primary aspect of life's history (see Gould, 1996a, and pp. 897–901 of this book for an elaboration of this argument). And if we must honor animals in our parochialism, arthropods surely hold an enormous edge over vertebrates.

I have referred (Gould, 1985a) to this failure of Darwin's sensible argument to impress itself upon the actual history of life as “the paradox of the first tier” — thus also giving away my preference between the two major possibili­ties for resolution (see forthcoming discussion, and my defense of nonfractal “tiers” of time with different predominating causes and patterns, with Dar­win's good argument operating only at the first tier, and unable to “push through” to impose a pervasive vector upon the history of life). If we accept my characterization of this situation as a paradox, then we must ask why a valid argument for progress, based upon the uniformitarian extrapolation through geological time of the microevolutionary mechanics of natural selec­tion, fails to make its anticipated mark upon earthly phylogeny. As an ab­stract issue in logic, two “pure” end-member solutions can be specified be­cause the basic proposition includes two assertions, with the falsification of either being sufficient to destroy the full argument even if the other assertion remains entirely valid. (Needless to say, the actual resolution of the paradox in our messy “real world” will, no doubt, combine aspects of both with nu­merous other factors as well.)

The first assertion holds that natural selection, operating primarily by biotic competition under ecological plenitude, will indeed generate a bias towards “progress” by granting a statistical edge to general mental and biomechanical improvement. The second assertion then holds that this micro-evolutionary edge should accumulate smoothly, through time and up lev­els, to yield the general vector of life's progress that Darwin described in his geological chapters (see quotes on pp. 467–479). Thus, refutation at the first end-member accepts full fractality and extrapolation from microevolutionary generality to macroevolutionary pattern, but denies that microevolution works in Darwin's required manner. The opposite refutation of the second end-member fully accepts Darwin's argument for the operation of microevolution, but denies the extrapolationist premise of scaling in continu­ity to impart the same theme of progress to higher levels, and thus to life's broadest history.

If only for the obvious reason that Darwinian selection has been so overwhelmingly validated, both empirically and theoretically, as a dominant mechanism of evolutionary change in populations at generational time scales, the first end-member refutation has not garnered much consideration or sup­port, although Raup's principled exploration (1991b, 1992, 1996), to be dis­cussed just below, deserves considerable respect and attention, if only to re­mind us that apparently absurd propositions may hold far more plausibility than our knee-jerk reactions allow. But the second end-member, based on the opposite premise of nonextrapolatability for a Darwinian mechanism fully valid at its primary, smallest scale, tier of time, has been — correctly in my judgment — the standard, if usually inchoate or inarticulated, view of paleon­tologists uncomfortable with the full sufficiency of microevolutionary princi­ples to explain the entire history of life. The scaling of time's tiers, in this sec­ond position (and to cite a pair of metaphors), is neither fractal nor isometric.

Before defending this second position as the key to solving the paradox of the first tier, I should say that, despite some initial enthusiasm as our profes­sion first embraced the renewed respectability of catastrophism, I doubt that any paleontologist would now defend a dichotomous division of time into two tiers — an ordinary or “background” world, granted entirely to Darwin­ian mechanisms, between catastrophic episodes; and a few, but markedly ef­fective, momentary disruptions of this generality in episodes of mass extinc­tion. This model of an alternation between background and wipeout regimes presents far too simple a picture, while admittedly capturing the central prin­ciple of higher and rarer modes that must be titrated with ordinary Darwin­ism to generate the full pattern. As with the cognate theme of hierarchical lev­els of selection, explored and defended throughout this book, we must try to render time as a series of rising tiers, each featuring distinctive modes of evo­lution, and each functioning as a gatekeeper to bar full passage, a ringmaster to add new acts to the mix, and a facilitator to alter, in interesting ways, the expression of conventional Darwinism in its domain.

Time's higher tiers, in other words, introduce causes and phenomena to ex­pand the modalities of evolution, not to restrict or refute the powerful Dar­winian forces that rise from the organismal level in ecological time, but do not maintain their pervasive sway in these broader realms. Again, as with ris­ing hierarchical levels of structure, our increasing understanding of evolution at time's upper tiers establishes the architecture of a larger, sturdier, and inter­estingly different Darwinian edifice, and does not operate as a demolition team for razing old domiciles and then building some hurried heap of super­ficial appeal, thrown up without a foundation, and therefore destined to top­ple as soon as the inevitable winds of fashion change their capricious course.





Fractal iconoclasm scaled down


In evolutionary theory, the canonical observation of inverse relationship be­tween frequency of occurrence and intensity of effect has generally been used to deny the force, or even the existence, of the largest pulses as too rare to matter, even in the amplitude of geological time. (Fisher's citation, invoked to privilege small events by their overwhelming frequency, opens the general ar­gument in his Genetical Theory of Natural Selection (see pp. 508–514), and remains the classical example in Darwinian literature.) Interestingly, the ap­plication of this inverse relationship to assess the range of catastrophic mod­els had proceeded in precisely the opposite manner — from accepting the mag­nitude of a proven single event (the K-T extinction) at maximal scale, and then extrapolating down to ask whether much more common small events of the same type could yield enough oomph and frequency to provide an alter­native account for our Darwinian preferences at the ecological scale of natu­ral selection's supposed and undoubted domination.

My dearest paleontological colleague David M. Raup has delighted me throughout my career, and kept an entire profession on its collective toes, by acting as Peck's Bad Boy to express outrageous and unthinkable ideas in the form of testable hypotheses. I confess that I have never quite figured out whether Dave believes in, or would place more than a minuscule probability upon, the hypotheses behind several of his tests; or whether he just loves to play the role that the Church wished to assign to Galileo — that is, to pre­sent the almost surely untrue as a hypothetical claim in mathematical form, thereby to sharpen our empirical and logical skills in finding best arguments for truthful propositions. Only once did I ever win an argument against one of his null hypotheses, or “beans in a bag” models, for random worlds com­posed of identical objects. Raup held for several years (before the Alvarez data convinced him of the reality of a K-T event) that mass extinctions might be entirely artifactual, representing only an occasional extreme in sampling from an actual set of equally sized extinction pulses. “But Dave,” I would say in frustration, “perhaps the Permo-Triassic granddaddy of all extinctions can be rendered statistically as no more than an extreme sample from a uniform pool. Still, you can't deny that, on Earth, the Triassic organisms that actually reappear are so different from their Permian forebears. Something 'real' must have happened then.” I think that he finally acquiesced to this point!

Raup developed his extreme model as a thought experiment because mass extinction by bolide impact might, at least in principle, be regarded as ran­dom in both of Eble's (1999) senses previously called, in this particular con­text, the “random” and “different rules” models (see p. 1314) — that is, either truly so in the formal statistical sense, or only so in the vernacular sense that reasons for differential success in such catastrophically altered moments must be exaptive with respect to Darwinian bases for evolving the relevant features in the first place, and in background times. Raup therefore posed the follow­ing sly question: if this broad sense of randomness applies to the largest event, and if the famous inverse curve of frequency vs. effect implies a continuity in causality as well, then maybe we should extrapolate down and reconceptualize the smaller and much more common extinctions as equally random in their raison d'etre (in opposition to the knee jerk view that local Darwin­ian determinism rules for ecological moments in competition by wedging, whereas randomness can only enter at higher levels, where the speed and in­tensity of an input can catch a Bauplane unawares).

Such a model of fractal continuity in extinction, triggered by sudden im­pact at all scales and levels, might be conceptualized as a “field of bullets” (Raup, 1991a) — with agents of destruction raining from the sky and death as a random consequence of residence in the wrong place at the wrong time (when each member of the population expresses exactly the same properties as any other, and with each independent of all others). One might conceptual­ize the agents of catastrophic destruction (the field of bullets) in either of two ways:

First, the random shooter in the sky may, for each episode of the game, re­lease a varying number of simultaneous bullets of identical form, with contin­ually decreasing probability of a larger number (following the inverse curve of frequency and magnitude). Thus, as a lazy or compassionate character, he hurls only one bullet most often, but must occasionally release such a dense load that few inhabitants can escape annihilation. Thus, the vast majority of moments feature none, one, or just a few extinctions, easily equated with our usual idea of a “background,” but with causes just as random in their “selec­tion” of targets, and just as sudden in their effects, as in the largest event of mass extinction. Once in a great while, following the dictates of the same dis­tribution and its implied continuity in causality, bullets reach the extirpating density of the nearly continuous sheet of arrows launched by the English longbowmen at Agincourt in 1415, where the French suffered some 6000 deaths to an English handful. Second, the random shooter might always re­lease the same number of projectiles, this time following the inverse curve by using smaller bullets (covering a tiny percentage of territory) most of the time, and large bombs (flattening most of life's field) only rarely, at the much lower frequency of mass extinctions.

In practice, Raup (1991b, 1992, 1996) derived a “kill curve” (his chosen term) from the empirical compendium of generic level extinctions per geolog­ical stage developed by J. J. Sepkoski, and widely used by the entire “taxon counting” school of modern paleobiology (see Figure 12-1). The frequency distribution, based on Sepkoski's data, assumes the expected inverse form, monotonic and strongly right skewed, with about half the 106 geological units (with their average duration of 6 million years) plotting in the leftmost interval, and showing less than 10 percent extinction of genera.

Raup's kill curve (Figure 12-2) follows the familiar form (the inverse relationship of frequency and magnitude again) that generates such vernacular concepts as the “100 year flood” — so often, and so tragically, misunderstood by so many people who, for lack of education to undo one of the most stub­born of our inherent mental foibles, do not grasp the basic meaning of proba­bility and assume, for example, that they may safely build their house on the floodplain because the 100 year deluge swept through the region five years ago and therefore cannot recur for almost another century. Raup freely admits that the orderly and monotonic form of the kill curve does not spec­ify any style of causality by itself — and, most relevantly and especially, does not permit an inference about random effects at lowest levels merely be­cause we can advance a powerful case for this style in one event at the highest level.

Nonetheless, the numerical specifics of Earth's particular curve does impose





12-1. From Raup, 1996. Typical negative correlation of intensity of extinction and frequency of occurrence, with small extinctions common and large events rare.





12-2. From Raup, 1996. The “kill curve” derived from Figure 12-1, showing expected waiting time between extinction events of various magnitudes — with longer waiting times for larger events.





some restriction of possibilities, and does suggest some causal infer­ences. Raup notes (1996), in particular, that if each species, following Dar­win's explicit claims (cited at the beginning of this chapter), pursued its own independent history of origin, expansion, reduction and death in terms of its own special competitive prowess vs. other unique species in singular faunas — thus implying that no general cause can impact all species at once (or at least that such general causes only nudge, and do not set or determine, the overall pattern) — then the kill curve, while continuing to obey its predictable mono-tonic form, would never reach such high percentages of death in its rarest up­per episodes. Such concentration in mass extinction does imply a coordinated cause of some sort. Raup writes (1996, p. 422):

If each genus died out independently of the others, the probability of producing a range of from near zero to 52 percent extinction in 106 six million year stages would be negligible. This means that pulses of extinc­tions of genera must be connected in some way . . . because of common factors, such as ecological interdependence or shared physical stress. We thus see a picture of episodic extinction wherein the more intense an ex­tinction episode, the rarer it is. To describe extinction only as back­ground or mass extinction, as is commonly done, is to hide much of the structure of the extinction phenomenon.





The nonfractal tiering of time


Strict Darwinism implies continuity in the style and causal structure of change from successive generations in populations to the waxing and waning of faunas across geological eras. An alternate construction of time as a series of discrete tiers, or at least of rising “regions of coagulation” that pull phe­nomena away from boundaries and towards more central nucleating places — with each tier then featuring different weights and styles, or even truly dis­tinct modes, of causality — would seriously challenge the crucial extrapolationist premise of Darwinian logic (the third leg on my tripod of support). Al­though I know the quibbles and inconsistencies, and I recognize that many of my neontological colleagues regard such problems as central flaws worth a lifetime's research, I have no personal quarrel with Darwin's argument that a vector of general progress would pervade the history of life if all scales of time record the competitive styles of natural selection supposedly prevailing at the first tier of anagenetic change within the history of single populations. We should therefore take firm notice, and regard as highly paradoxical, the fail­ure of life's history to feature such a vector as an obvious organizing principle and predominant signal of phylogeny.

I reject, for the most part, the Raupian solution of fractality in time, with Darwinian inefficacy throughout. Instead, I favor the alternative view that Darwinism basically works as advertised in its own realm at the first tier of time, but cannot “push through” to impose its characteristic signal upon pro­cesses and phenomena of higher tiers. Such a proposal implies a very different attitude towards time and change — an attitude inspired and encouraged by two controversial topics of the last quarter of the 20th century: punctuated equilibrium and catastrophic mass extinction, our two most notorious hy­potheses about the non-homogeneity of time's principal modes.

In proposing that we conceptualize time as a rising set of tiers, I do not argue (thus hoping to forestall, by this explicit statement, the same mis­understanding kindled by the debate about hierarchical levels of selection) that entirely new, and truly anti-Darwinian, forces emerge at each higher tier. I am quite content to allow that no fundamental laws of nature, and any en­tirely novel causes or phenomena, make their first appearance in larger slices of time. But, at these broader scales and intervals, the known principles of genetics, and the documented mechanisms of selection, may operate by dis­tinct and emergent rules that, as a consequence of time's tiering, cannot be fully predicted from the operation of the same kinds of causes at lower levels. The logic of this critique flows from potential fallacies in Darwinian assump­tions about extrapolation across time's putative smoothness and causality's supposed invariance. (Selection on species-individuals, for example, follows all the abstract and general principles required by Darwinism for this central mechanism of the general theory, but the modes and regularities of selection at this higher level differ strongly, and cannot be predicted, from our canoni­cal understanding of Darwinian organismal selection within populations — see Chapter 8.)

The dilemma, and eventual insufficiency of the Modern Synthesis for paleontology lay in this third crucial Darwinian claim that all theory could be extrapolated from the first tier, thus converting macroevolution from a source of theory into a pure phenomenology — a body of information to document and to render consistent with a theoretical edifice derived elsewhere. But if the tiers of time, and the hierarchy of life's structure, create pattern by emer­gent rules not predictable from processes and activities at lower tiers, then pa­leontology will add insights, and augment theory, without contradicting the principles of lower tiers.

We need to distinguish between the stability and continuity of causal prin­ciples (the spatiotemporal invariance of natural law in our usual jargon) and the potentially discontinuous (and disparate) expression of these principles across a spectrum of time that may be strongly stepped (as nucleating points attract surrounding events, and as nature's inherent structure clears out space at the unstable positions between), rather than fully and smoothly continu­ous. I began my original article (Gould, 1985a, p. 2) on the tiering of time with an admittedly humble analogy that may still help to clarify the impor­tant principle of noncontradiction between structural tiering and a unitary order of underlying entities and causes:

In the glory days of Victoria's reign, when a pound bought more than five American dollars, the English economy operated on two distinct tiers. The working man, paid weekly for his labor and without benefit of banking or hope of accumulation, might pass his entire life without ever seeing a pound note, for he received his wage in shillings and pence and its total never reached a full pound. Meanwhile, bankers in the City of London transacted the world's imperial business in pounds. India today operates on two similar and largely noninteracting tiers — the 100-rupee notes (about ten dollars) of the hotel shops and the bustling economy of the bazaars, where 10 rupees buy at least one of anything and no one ever sees (or could cash) a 100-rupee note.

Our world of times and amounts is not always continuous. Its metrics usually extend smoothly from one end to the other (shillings did grade to pounds and rupees are rupees), but its activities are often sharply con­centrated in definite regions of a potential spectrum, with large open spaces between. Systems often drive in opposite directions away from break points; location on one or another side of a threshold inevitably pushes toward an equilibrium far above or below.



I do not know if we should make a formal attempt to specify a definite number of tiers in time — as the principle seems sound, whereas definite crite­ria for precise designation seem elusive. (I remain far more comfortable and confident with the concept of hierarchy in levels of selection than with the in­creasing scale of tiers in time — for the genealogical hierarchy can be eluci­dated with fair precision by criteria of Darwinian individuality (see Chapter 8), whereas time's tiers lack such a unitary concept for coordination. For the same reason, I do not follow my closest colleague Niles Eldredge's attempt to identify dual or parallel hierarchies of genealogy and ecology, for the genea­logical units enjoy clear definition, whereas ecological levels, like time's tiers, lack a coherent fundamentum divisionis for unambiguous specification.)

But if I may make an analogy to the geological time scale for the Phanerozoic eon, we may at least be confident about the few broadest tiers (the three geological eras in my analogy), even while we argue about some boundaries and specifications for the smaller units within these broad domains (geologi­cal periods in my analogy). Darwinian organismal selection, with an overall statistical edge granted to biotic competition in crowded ecosystems, domi­nates the first tier of anagenesis within populations during ecological time. If the fractal principle of Darwin's central belief in extrapolation held, then the norms of this process at the first tier would accumulate in a linear fashion through time to yield a history of life with the same basic form and causal structure, but scaled up in smooth continuity to generate all patterns of phylogeny. I have designated life's failure to display this pattern, particularly its disinclination to feature a clear signal of overall progress, as the “paradox of the first tier.”

As stated above, I would resolve this paradox by accepting Darwin's ba­sic view of pattern and causality at the first tier, but then asserting that dis­tinct modes of change and balances of causes, operating at higher tiers, intro­duce enough systematic difference to cancel out the first tier's vector. If the first tier governs anagenesis within populations, then the second tier features trends within monophyletic clades. Darwinian tradition holds (as discussed throughout this book, but primarily in Chapters 2 and 9) that such phyletic trends be explained, by simple extension and extrapolation, as adaptive ana­genesis carried further through time's geological fullness. I shall not here re­hearse the lengthy arguments and documentation of Chapter 9, but I believe that punctuated equilibrium, as the dominant pattern and process of the sec­ond tier during millions of “background” years between pulses of mass ex­tinction, undoes the first tier's vector of progress by supplying a radically different general explanation for phyletic trends: the differential success of certain species within clades, with each species treated as a stable individual during the several million years of its average geological existence. Since the reasons for differential success of species extend so far beyond (while also in­cluding) the traditional citation of adaptive biomechanical advantages for constituent organisms; and since several of these reasons tend to run orthogo­nal, or even counter, to general expectations of organismal progress; the crafting of trends by punctuated equilibrium derails extrapolation from the first tier, thus providing the second tier with a different set of explanations for its central phenomenon of cladal trending.

This barrier at the second tier would be sufficient, by itself, to resolve the paradox of the first tier, but even the second tier's rules for trending do not ac­cumulate through broader realms of time to explain, by smooth extrapola­tion, the patterns of waxing and waning for major taxonomic groups. That is, the causes of cladal trends through long geological intervals of “normal” time do not accumulate to patterns of success and failure through the full Phanerozoic range. For, as the preceding section of this chapter documented, the “random” and “different rules” models of differential success in epi­sodes of catastrophic extinction then derail the phyletic trends of the second tier for the same basic reason that these cladal trends previously undid the anagenetic accumulations of the first tier: that is, by introducing new patterns and rules at these rare moments of maximal impact. Thus, in summary, adap­tive anagenesis of a single lineage at the first tier cannot be extrapolated to cladal trends within a monophyletic group of species at the second tier; and these cladal trends of the second tier then cannot be extrapolated through episodes of mass extinction to explain patterns of differential success for life's higher taxa throughout Phanerozoic time. Punctuated equilibrium undoes anagenesis, and catastrophic mass extinction derails punctuated equi­librium.

As with the workings of hierarchical levels in selection, the effects of adja­cent tiers of time may interact in all possible ways. Higher tiers do not auto­matically counteract lower tiers. Adjacent tiers may also reinforce each other to intensify a signal in life's history — as I illustrated, for example, in reporting Jablonski's claim (1987) that species selection on species-rich subclades at the second tier often reinforces the adaptive advantages gained by the organisms of these species in Darwinian selection at the first tier. Similarly, if only for exaptive merits at the higher tier, diatoms flourished by virtue of the same fea­tures at both the first and third tiers (if my argument on page 1319 holds) — as the evolution of mechanisms for dormancy proved adaptive at the first tier in aiding survival during high-latitude months of darkness and in times of low silica between episodes of upwelling; whereas the same feature may have fa­vored the persistence of diatom species during a prolonged period of darkness imposed by a global dust cloud excavated in bolide impact, the key ingredient advocated by many researchers for the killing scenario of the K-T event.

But adjacent tiers may also act in an orthogonal manner, with invocation of the “random” model at the third tier as an obvious general case — for truly random differential survival must run orthogonal to deterministic Darwinian reasons for evolving the clade's distinctive traits at the first tier, or equally de­terministic (but different) reasons for establishing the defining features of cladal trends by punctuated equilibrium at the second tier. Finally, the evident possibility of opposing reasons at adjacent tiers has sparked our interest in catastrophic mass extinction from the start — with dinosaurian superiority over mammals maintained at the first and second tiers throughout Mesozoic times, and mammalian success then achieved by the “different rules” model at the third tier of differential passage through mass extinction, putatively based upon the very features that marked the first and second tier failures of mammals for 130 million previous years.

Although limited space and personal competence prevent my proceeding beyond this sketchy and cartoonish model of three tiers, I suspect that future work will identify several inhomogeneities and subtiers, particularly between the history of independent and individual clades at the second tier and the co­ordinated impact of environments upon entire biotas at the third tier. Several intermediate modes and processes, affecting groups of species during times of unusual externalities in particular geographic regions, but not global biotas at catastrophic moments, must “intervene” between the pure influence of punctuated equilibrium upon a single clade and the full impact of world­wide catastrophe upon a global biota. For example, the model of coordinated stasis (discussed on pp. 916–922) argues that cladal trends do not always maintain the implied freedom of punctuated equilibrium to proceed indepen­dently, and in an unconstrained manner by differential success in the generation of new species at the second tier, but will often be subject to a form of community stasis that must first be broken by disruptions smaller than mass extinction, and resident within its own tier. Similarly, between the first and second tier, ordinary anagenesis often cannot “push through,” even to the point of disruption by punctuated equilibrium at the second tier, because the ecological communities that set the anagenetic regime for a single species be­come disrupted on a scale of hundreds of thousands of years by the climatic fluctuations of Milankovitch cycles that break up communities and quickly disperse their elements into new arrangements in different places.

To conclude this section with a historical example of the profound distinc­tion between traditional untiered views of selective domination smoothly scaled up to all times and magnitudes, and the alternative nonfractal con­cept of a much broader range of potential outcomes engendered by interac­tion among the characteristic modes and processes at different tiers, consider the famous conclusion from Hatcher, Marsh and Lull's 1907 monograph on the anatomy, taxonomy, evolution and extinction of ceratopsian dino­saurs. In ending their text with a section on “probable causes of extinction,” these three great paleontologists only allowed themselves to consider the two standard hypotheses of the conventional uniformitarian school of pure ex­trapolation, complete with its Darwinian assumption that vectors of general progress must pervade such systems (in this instance by the replacement of di­nosaurs with mammals, for reasons of warm-blooded superiority in anatomi­cal design and mentality). In either case, they argue, the extinction must spread through an extended time in several episodes, step by step. The two reasons themselves — biotic competition from a superior group, and adaptive failure in the face of changes in the physical environment imposed by ordi­nary terrestrial forces (acting at greater than their usual intensity, but still in their characteristic mode) — cause inferior groups to peter out as life gets better and better through each geological day:

Several theories have been advanced as to the probable causes of extinc­tion of the Ceratopsia ... It seems that animals of another race, or hordes of creatures which emigrated from another region, would be more likely to exterminate their predecessors. The mammals fulfill the requirements of a new foe, and the development of the frill in the Cera­topsia has been considered as meeting the necessity for a better protec­tion of the neck blood vessels from the weasel-like attack of small but bloodthirsty quadrupeds. Another notion . . . was that the Cretaceous mammals sought out the eggs of dinosaurs and destroyed them — Cope even going so far as to suggest the Multituberculata, with their long, sharp anterior teeth, as the probable offenders...

By far the most reasonable cause . . . seems to be changing climatic conditions and a contracting and draining of the swamp and delta re­gions caused by the orographic upheavals which occurred toward the close of the Cretaceous. The Ceratopsidae and their nearest allies, the Trachodontidae, both highly specialized plant feeders, were unable to adapt themselves to a profoundly changed environment because of this very specialization, and, as a consequence, perished.

That the Ceratopsia made a gallant struggle for survival seems evident, for they lived through the first series of upheavals at the close of the Laramie and also the second series at the close of the Arapahoe, which were accompanied by great volcanic outbursts in the Colorado region; but the changes accompanying the final upheaval which formed most of the great western mountain chains and closed the Mesozoic era gave the death blow to this remarkable race (Hatcher, Marsh and Lull, 1907, p. 195).



But new perspectives from two higher tiers have reversed this convention­ality, particularly for a vigorous group like the ceratopsians. At the second tier, these particular dinosaurs, among all other subclades, remained in maxi­mal flourish of expansion and speciation right to the close of Cretaceous times, and surely cannot be marked as doomed, or even in decline with re­spect to mammals, during such a period of maintenance and expansion by co­pious speciation, or introduction of new Darwinian species-individuals at this macroevolutionary level. And then, with catastrophism reintroduced at the third tier as a hypothesis of renewed respectability, the ceratopsians died, in concert with all other dinosaurs (leaving the anatomically divergent birds as sole survivors of their monophyletic clade), when an unpredictable paroxys­mal change radically altered earthly environments and drove several groups to extinction through no adaptive failure of their own, while imparting fortu­itous exaptive success to creatures that had lived throughout the long reign of dinosaurs, and never made any headway towards displacement, or even to­wards shared domination with one of the most successful vertebrate groups in the history of life.

