## 0101Defining and Revising the Structure of Evolutionary Theory

### 1.1 Theories Need Both Essences and Histories

In a famous passage added to later editions of the Origin of Species, Charles Darwin (1872, p. 134) generalized his opening statement on the apparent ab­surdity of evolving a complex eye through a long series of gradual steps by re­minding his readers that they should always treat "obvious" truths with skepticism. In so doing, Darwin also challenged the celebrated definition of science as "organized common sense," as championed by his dear friend Thomas Henry Huxley. Darwin wrote: "When it was first said that the sun stood still and world turned round, the common sense of mankind declared the doctrine false; but the old saying of Vox populi, vox Dei [the voice of the people is the voice of God], as every philosopher knows, cannot be trusted in science."

Despite his firm residence within England's higher social classes, Darwin took a fully egalitarian approach towards sources of expertise, knowing full well that the most dependable data on behavior and breeding of domesticated and cultivated organisms would be obtained from active farmers and hus­bandmen, not from lords of their manors or authors of theoretical treatises. As Ghiselin (1969) so cogently stated, Darwin maintained an uncompromis­ingly "aristocratic" set of values towards judgment of his work — that is, he cared not a whit for the outpourings of vox populi, but fretted endlessly and fearfully about the opinions of a very few key people blessed with the rare mix of intelligence, zeal, and attentive practice that we call expertise (a demo­cratic human property, respecting only the requisite mental skills and emo­tional toughness, and bearing no intrinsic correlation to class, profession or any other fortuity of social circumstance).

Darwin ranked Hugh Falconer, the Scottish surgeon, paleontologist, and Indian tea grower, within this most discriminating of all his social groups, a panel that included Hooker, Huxley and Lyell as the most prominent mem­bers. Thus, when Falconer wrote his important 1863 paper on American fos­sil elephants (see Chapter 9, pages 745–749, for full discussion of this inci­dent), Darwin flooded himself with anticipatory fear, but then rejoiced in his critic's generally favorable reception of evolution, as embodied in the closing sentence of Falconer's key section: "Darwin has, beyond all his cotemporaries [sic], given an impulse to the philosophical investigation of the most back­ward and obscure branch of the Biological Sciences of his day; he has laid the foundations of a great edifice; but he need not be surprised if, in the progress of erection, the superstructure is altered by his successors, like the Duomo of Milan, from the roman to a different style of architecture."

In a letter to Falconer on October 1, 1862 (in F. Darwin, 1903, volume 1, p. 206), Darwin explicitly addressed this passage in Falconer's text. (Darwin had received an advance copy of the manuscript, along with Falconer's re­quest for review and criticism — hence Darwin's reply, in 1862, to a text not printed until the following year): "To return to your concluding sentence: far from being surprised, I look at it as absolutely certain that very much in the Origin will be proved rubbish; but I expect and hope that the framework will stand."

The statement that God (or the Devil, in some versions) dwells in the de­tails must rank among the most widely cited intellectual witticisms of our time. As with many clever epigrams that spark the reaction "I wish I'd said that!", attribution of authorship tends to drift towards appropriate famous sources. (Virtually any nifty evolutionary saying eventually migrates to Т. Н. Huxley, just as vernacular commentary about modern America moves to­wards Mr. Berra.) The apostle of modernism in architecture, Ludwig Mies van der Rohe, may, or may not, have said that "God dwells in the details," but the plethora of tiny and subtle choices that distinguish the elegance of his great buildings from the utter drabness of superficially similar glass boxes throughout the world surely validates his candidacy for an optimal linkage of word and deed.

Architecture may assert a more concrete claim, but nothing beats the extraordinary subtlety of language as a medium for expressing the importance of apparently trivial details. The architectural metaphors of Milan's cathe­dral, used by both Falconer and Darwin, may strike us as effectively identical at first read. Falconer says that the foundations will persist as Darwin's leg­acy, but that the superstructure will probably be reconstructed in a quite dif­ferent style. Darwin responds by acknowledging Falconer's conjecture that the theory of natural selection will undergo substantial change; indeed, in his characteristically diffident way, Darwin even professes himself "absolutely certain" that much of the Origin's content will be exposed as "rubbish." But he then states not only a hope, but also an expectation, that the "framework" will stand.

We might easily read this correspondence too casually as a polite dialogue between friends, airing a few unimportant disagreements amidst a commit­ment to mutual support. But I think that this exchange between Falconer and Darwin includes a far more "edgy" quality beneath its diplomacy. Consider the different predictions that flow from the disparate metaphors chosen by each author for the Duomo of Milan — Falconer's "foundation" vs. Darwin's "framework." After all, a foundation is an invisible system of support, sunk into the ground, and intended as protection against sinking or toppling of the overlying public structure. A framework, on the other hand, defines the basic form and outline of the public structure itself. Thus, the two men conjure up very different pictures in their crystal balls. Falconer expects that the underly­ing evolutionary principle of descent with modification will persist as a fac­tual foundation for forthcoming theories devised to explain the genealogical tree of life. Darwin counters that the theory of natural selection will persist as a basic explanation of evolution, — even though many details, and even some subsidiary generalities, cited within the Origin will later be rejected as false, or even illogical.

I stress this distinction, so verbally and disarmingly trivial at a first and superficial skim through Falconer's and Darwin's words, but so incisive and portentous as contrasting predictions about the history of evolutionary the­ory, because my own position — closer to Falconer than to Darwin, but in ac­cord with Darwin on one key point — led me to write this book, while also supplying the organizing principle for the "one long argument" of its entirety. I do believe that the Darwinian framework, and not just the foundation, per­sists in the emerging structure of a more adequate evolutionary theory. But I also hold, with Falconer, that substantial changes, introduced during the last half of the 20th century, have built a structure so expanded beyond the origi­nal Darwinian core, and so enlarged by new principles of macroevolutionary explanation, that the full exposition, while remaining within the domain of Darwinian logic, must be construed as basically different from the canonical theory of natural selection, rather than simply extended.

A closer study of the material basis for Falconer and Darwin's metaphors — the Duomo (or Cathedral) of Milan — might help to clarify this important distinction. As with so many buildings of such size, expense, and centrality (both geographically and spiritually), the construction of the Duomo occupied sev­eral centuries and included an amalgam of radically changing styles and pur­poses. Construction began at the chevet, or eastern end, of the cathedral in the late 14th century. The tall windows of the chevet, with their glorious flamboyant tracery, strike me as the finest achievement of the entire structure, and as the greatest artistic expression of this highly ornamented latest Gothic style. (The term "flamboyant" literally refers to the flame-shaped element so extensively used in the tracery, but the word then came to mean "richly deco­rated" and "showy," initially as an apt description of the overall style, but then extended to the more general meaning used today.)

Coming now to the main point, construction then slowed considerably, and the main western facade and entrance way (Fig. 1-1) dates from the late 16th century, when stylistic preferences had changed drastically from the points, curves and traceries of Gothic to the orthogonal, low-angled or gently rounded lintels and pediments of classical Baroque preferences. Thus, the first two tiers of the main (western) entrance to the Duomo display a style that, in one sense, could not be more formally discordant with Gothic elements of de­sign, but that somehow became integrated into an interesting coherence. (The third tier of the western facade, built much later, returned to a "retro" Gothic style, thus suggesting a metaphorical reversal of phylogenetic conventions, as up leads to older — in style if not in actual time of emplacement!) Finally, in a distinctive and controversial icing upon the entire structure (Fig. 1-2), the "wedding cake," or row-upon-row of Gothic pinnacles festooning the tops of all walls and arches with their purely ornamental forms, did not crown the edifice until the beginning of the 19th century, when Napoleon conquered the city and ordered their construction to complete the Duomo after so many centuries of work. (These pinnacle forests may amuse or disgust architectural purists, but no one can deny their unintended role in making the Duomo so uniquely and immediately recognizable as the icon of the city.)

1-1. The west facade (main entrance) of Milan Cathedral, built in baroque style in the 16th century, with a retro-gothic third tier added later.

How, then, shall we state the most appropriate contrast between the Duomo of Milan and the building of evolutionary theory since Darwin's Ori­gin in 1859? If we grant continuity to the intellectual edifice (as implied by comparison with a discrete building that continually grew but did not change its location or basic function), then how shall we conceive "the structure of evolutionary theory" (chosen, in large measure, as the title for this book be­cause I wanted to address, at least in practical terms, this central question in the history and content of science)? Shall we accept Darwin's triumphalist stance and hold that the framework remains basically fixed, with all visually substantial change analogous to the non-structural, and literally superficial, icing of topmost pinnacles? Or shall we embrace Falconer's richer and more critical, but still fully positive, concept of a structure that has changed in radical

1-2. The "wedding cake" pinnacles that festoon the top of Milan Cathedral, and that were not built until the first years of the 19th century after Napoleon conquered the city.

ways by incorporating entirely different styles into crucial parts of the building (even the front entrance!), while still managing to integrate all the differences into a coherent and functional whole, encompassing more and more territory in its continuing enlargement?

Darwin's version remains Gothic, and basically unchanged beyond the vi­sual equivalent of lip service. Falconer's version retains the Gothic base as a positive constraint and director, but then branches out into novel forms that mesh with the base but convert the growing structure into a new entity, largely defined by the outlines of its history. (Note that no one has suggested the third alternative, often the fate of cathedrals — destruction, either total or, partial, followed by a new building of contrary or oppositional form, erected over a different foundation.)

In order to enter such a discourse about "the structure of evolutionary the­ory" at all, we must accept the validity, or at least the intellectual coherence and potential definability, of some key postulates and assumptions that are often not spelled out at all (especially by scientists supposedly engaged in the work), and are, moreover, not always granted this form of intelligibility by philosophers and social critics who do engage such questions explicitly. Most importantly, I must be able to describe a construct like "evolutionary theory" as a genuine "thing" — an entity with discrete boundaries and a definable his­tory — especially if I want to "cash out," as more than a confusingly poetic image, an analogy to the indubitable bricks and mortar of a cathedral.

In particular, and to formulate the general problem in terms of the specific example needed to justify the existence of this book, can "Darwinism" or "Darwinian theory" be treated as an entity with defining properties of "ana­tomical form" that permit us to specify a beginning and, most crucially for the analysis I wish to pursue, to judge the subsequent history of Darwinism with enough rigor to evaluate successes, failures and, especially, the degree and character of alterations? This book asserts, as its key premise and one long argument, that such an understanding of modern evolutionary theory places the subject in a particularly "happy" intellectual status — with the cen­tral core of Darwinian logic sufficiently intact to maintain continuity as the centerpiece of the entire field, but with enough important changes (to all ma­jor branches extending from this core) to alter the structure of evolutionary theory into something truly different by expansion, addition, and redefini­tion. In short, "The structure of evolutionary theory" combines enough sta­bility for coherence with enough change to keep any keen mind in a perpetual mode of search and challenge.

The distinction between Falconer's and Darwin's predictions, a key ingredi­ent in my analysis, rests upon our ability to define the central features of Darwinism (its autapomorphies, if you will), so that we may then discern whether the extent of alteration in our modern understanding of evolutionary mechanisms and causes remains within the central logic of this Darwinian foundation, or has now changed so profoundly that, by any fair criterion in vernacular understanding of language, or by any more formal account of de­parture from original premises, our current explanatory theory must be described as a different kind of mental "thing." How, in short, can such an in­tellectual entity be defined? And what degree of change can be tolerated or accommodated within the structure of such an entity before we must alter the name and declare the entity invalid or overthrown? Or do such questions just represent a fool's errand from the start, because intellectual positions can't be reified into sufficient equivalents of buildings or organisms to bear the weight of such an inquiry?

As arrogant as I may be in general, I am not sufficiently doltish or vainglorious to imagine that I can meaningfully address the deep philosophical ques­tions embedded within this general inquiry of our intellectual ages — that is, fruitful modes of analysis for the history of human thought. I shall therefore take refuge in an escape route that has traditionally been granted to scien­tists: the liberty to act as a practical philistine. Instead of suggesting a princi­pled and general solution, I shall ask whether I can specify an operational way to define "Darwinism" (and other intellectual entities) in a manner spe­cific enough to win shared agreement and understanding among readers, but broad enough to avoid the doctrinal quarrels about membership and alle­giance that always seem to arise when we define intellectual commitments as pledges of fealty to lists of dogmata (not to mention initiation rites, secret handshakes and membership cards — in short, the intellectual paraphernalia that led Karl Marx to make his famous comment to a French journalist: "je ne suis pas marxiste").

As a working proposal, and as so often in this book (and in human affairs in general), a "Goldilocks solution" embodies the blessedly practical kind of approach that permits contentious and self-serving human beings (God love us) to break intellectual bread together in pursuit of common goals rather than personal triumph. (For this reason, I have always preferred, as guides to human action, messy hypothetical imperatives like the Golden Rule, based on negotiation, compromise and general respect, to the Kantian categorical im­peratives of absolute righteousness, in whose name we so often murder and maim until we decide that we had followed the wrong instantiation of the right generality.) We must, in short and in this case, steer between the "too lit­tle" of refusing to grant any kind of "essence," or hard anatomy of defining concepts, to a theory like Darwinism; and the "too much" of an identification so burdened with a long checklist of exigent criteria that we will either spend all our time debating the status of particular items (and never addressing the heart or central meaning of the theory), or we will waste our efforts, and poi­son our communities, with arguments about credentials and anathemata, ap­plied to individual applicants for membership.

In his brilliant attempt to write a "living" history and philosophy of science about the contemporary restructuring of taxonomic theory by phenetic and cladistic approaches, Hull (1988) presents the most cogent argument I have ever read for "too little" on Goldilocks's continuum, as embodied in his de­fense of theories as "conceptual lineages" (1988, pp. 15-18). I enthusiasti­cally support Hull's decision to treat theories as "things," or individuals in the crucial sense of coherent historical entities — and in opposition to the standard tactic, in conventional scholarship on the "history of ideas," of tracing the chronology of expression for entirely abstract concepts defined only by formal similarity of content, and not at all by ties of historical continuity, or even of mutual awareness among defenders across centuries and varied cul­tures. (For example, Hull points out that such a conventional history of the "chain of being" would treat this notion as an invariant and disembodied Platonic archetype, independently "borrowed" from the eternal storehouse of potential models for natural reality, and then altered by scholars to fit local contexts across millennia and cultures.)

But I believe that Hull's laudable desire to recast the history of ideas as a narrative of entities in historical continuity, rather than as a disconnected chronology of tidbits admitted into a class only by sufficient formal similarity with an abstract ideological archetype, then leads him to an undervaluation of actual content. Hull exemplifies his basic approach (1988, p. 17): "A con­sistent application of what Mayr has termed 'population thinking' requires that species be treated as lineages, spatiotemporally localized particulars, in­dividuals. Hence, if conceptual change is to be viewed from an evolutionary perspective, concepts must be treated in the same way. In order to count as the 'same concept,' two term-tokens must be part of the same conceptual lin­eage. Population thinking must be applied to thinking itself."

So far, so good. But Hull now extends this good argument for the necessity of historical connectivity into a claim for sufficiency as well — thus springing a logical trap that leads him to debase, or even to ignore, the "morphology" (or idea content) of these conceptual lineages. He states that he wishes to "organize term-tokens into lineages, not into classes of similar term-types" (pp. 16-17). I can accept the necessity of such historical continuity, but nei­ther I nor most scholars (including practicing scientists) will then follow Hull in his explicit and active rejection of similarity in content as an equally neces­sary criterion for continuing to apply the same name — Darwinian theory, for example — to a conceptual lineage.

At an extreme that generates a reductio ad absurdum for rejecting Hull's conclusion, but that Hull bravely owns as a logical entailment of his own prior decision, a pure criterion of continuity, imbued with no constraint of content, forces one to apply the same name to any conceptual lineage that has remained consciously intact and genealogically unbroken through several generations (of passage from teachers to students, for example), even if the current "morphology" of concepts directly inverts and contradicts the central arguments of the original theory. "A proposition can evolve into its contra­dictory," Hull allows (1988, p. 18). Thus, on this account, if the living intel­lectual descendants of Darwin, as defined by an unbroken chain of teaching, now believed that each species had been independently created within six days of 24 hours, this theory of biological order would legitimately bear the name of "Darwinism." And I guess that I may call myself kosher, even though I and all members of my household, by conscious choice and with great ideo­logical fervor, eat cheeseburgers for lunch every day — because we made this dietary decision in a macromutational shift of content, but with no genealogi­cal break in continuity, from ten previous generations of strict observers of kashrut.

The objections that most of us would raise to Hull's interesting proposition include both intellectual and moral components. Certain kinds of systems are, and should be, defined purely by genealogy and not at all by content. I am my father's son no matter how we interact. But such genealogical defini­tions, as validated by historical continuity, simply cannot adequately charac­terize a broad range of human groupings properly designated by similarity in content. When Cain mocked God's inquiry about Abel's whereabouts by ex­claiming "Am I my brother's keeper" (Genesis 4:9), he illustrated the appro­priateness of either genealogy by historical connection or fealty by moral re­sponsibility as the proper criterion for "brotherhood" in different kinds of categories. Cain could not deny his genealogical status as brother in one sense, but he derided a conceptual meaning, generally accorded higher moral worth as a consequence of choice rather than necessity of birth, in disclaim­ing any responsibility as keeper. As a sign that we have generally privileged the conceptual meaning, and that Cain's story still haunts us, we need only re­member Claudius's lament that his murder of his own brother (and Hamlet's father) "hath the primal eldest curse upon't."

Ordinary language, elementary logic, and a general sense of fairness all combine to favor such preeminence for a strong component of conceptual continuity in maintaining a name or label for a theory. Thus, if I wish to call myself a Darwinian in any just or generally accepted sense of such a claim, I do not qualify merely by documenting my residence within an unbroken lin­eage of teachers and students who have transmitted a set of changing ideas organized around a common core, and who have continued to study, aug­ment and improve the theory that bears such a longstanding and honorable label. I must also understand the content of this label myself, and I must agree with a set of basic precepts defining the broad ideas of a view of natural real­ity that I have freely chosen to embrace as my own. In calling myself a Dar­winian I accept these minimal obligations (from which I remain always and entirely free to extract myself should my opinions or judgments change); but I do not become a Darwinian by the mere default of accidental location within a familial or educational lineage.

Thus, if we agree that a purely historical, entirely content-free definition of allegiance to a theory represents "too little" commitment to qualify, and that we must buttress any genealogical criterion with a formal, logical, or anatom­ical definition framed in terms of a theory's intellectual content, then what kind or level of agreement shall we require as a criterion of allegiance for in­clusion? We now must face the opposite side of Goldilocks's dilemma — for once we advocate criteria of content, we do not wish to impose such strin­gency and uniformity that membership becomes more like a sworn obedience to an unchanging religious creed than a freely chosen decision based on per­sonal judgment and perception of intellectual merits. My allegiance to Darwinian theory, and my willingness to call myself a Darwinian biologist, must not depend on my subscription to all 95 articles that Martin Luther nailed to the Wittenburg church door in 1517; or to all 80 items in the Syllabus of Er­rors that Pio Nono (Pope Pius IX) proclaimed in 1864, including the "fal­lacy," so definitionally uncongenial to science, that "the Roman Pontiff can and should reconcile himself to and agree with progress, liberalism and mod­ern civilization"; or to all 39 articles of the Church of England, adopted by Queen Elizabeth in 1571 as a replacement for Archbishop Thomas Cranmer's 42 articles of 1553.

Goldilocks's "just right" position between these extremes will strike nearly all cooperatively minded intellectuals, committed to the operationality and advance of their disciplines, as eminently sensible: shared content, not only historical continuity, must define the structure of a scientific theory; but this shared content should be expressed as a minimal list of the few defining at­tributes of the theory's central logic — in other words, only the absolutely es­sential statements, absent which the theory would either collapse into fallacy or operate so differently that the mechanism would have to be granted an­other name.

Now such a minimal list of such maximal centrality and importance bears a description in ordinary language — but its proper designation requires that evolutionary biologists utter a word rigorously expunged from our profes­sional consciousness since day one of our preparatory course work: the con­cept that dare not speak its name — essence, essence, essence (say the word a few times out loud until the fear evaporates and the laughter recedes). It's high time that we repressed our aversion to this good and honorable word. Theories have essences. (So, by the way, and in a more restrictive and nuanced sense, do organisms — in their limitation and channeling by con­straints of structure and history, expressed as Bauplane of higher taxa. My critique of the second theme of Darwinian central logic, Chapters 4–5 and 10–11, will treat this subject in depth. Moreover, my partial defense of or­ganic essences, expressed as support for structuralist versions of evolutionary causality as potential partners with the more conventional Darwinian functionalism that understandably denies intelligibility to any notion of an es­sence, also underlies the double entendre of this book's title, which honors the intellectual structure of evolutionary theory within Darwinian traditions and their alternatives, and which also urges support for a limited version of structuralist theory, in opposition to certain strict Darwinian verities.)

Our unthinking rejection of essences can be muted, or even reversed into propensity for a sympathetic hearing, when we understand that an invocation of this word need not call down the full apparatus of an entirely abstract and eternal Platonic eidos — a reading of "essence" admittedly outside the logic of evolutionary theory, and historical modes of analysis in general. But the solu­tion to a meaningful notion of essence in biology lies within an important epi­sode in the history of emerging evolutionary views, a subject treated exten­sively in Chapter 4 of this book, with Goethe, Etienne Geoffroy St. Hilaire, and Richard Owen as chief protagonists.

After all, the notion of a general anatomical blueprint that contains all particular incarnations by acting as a fundamental building block (Goethe's leaf or Geoffroy's vertebra) moved long ago from conceptualization as a disem­bodied and nonmaterial archetype employed by a creator, to an actual struc­ture (or inherited developmental pathway) present in a flesh and blood ances­tor — a material basis for channeling, often in highly positive Ways, the future history of diversity within particular phyletic lineages. This switch from ar­chetype to ancestor permitted us to reformulate the idea of "essence" as broad and fruitful commonalities that unite a set of particulars into the most meaningful relationships of common causal structure and genesis. Our active use of this good word should not be hampered by a shyness and disquietude lacking any validity beyond the vestiges of suspicions originally set by battles won so long ago that no one can remember the original reasons for anathe­matization. Gracious (and confident) victors should always seek to revive the valid and important aspects of defeated but honorable systems. And the tran­scendental morphologists did understand the importance of designating a small but overarching set of defining architectural properties as legitimate es­sences of systems, both anatomical and conceptual.

Hull correctly defines theories as historical entities, properly subject to all the principles of narrative explanation — and I shall so treat Darwinian logic and its substantial improvements and changes throughout this book. But the­ories of range and power also feature inherent "essences," implicit in their logical structure, and operationally definable as minimal sets of proposi­tions so crucial to the basic function of a system that their falsification must undermine the entire structure, and also so necessary as an ensemble of mutual implication that all essential components must work in concert to set the theory's mechanism into smooth operation as a generator and explana­tion of nature's order. In staking out this middle Goldilockean ground be­tween (1) the "too little" of Hull's genealogical continuity without commit­ment to a shared content of intellectual morphology and (2) the "too much" of long lists of ideological fealty, superficially imbibed or memorized, and then invoked to define membership in ossified cults rather than thoughtful al­legiance to developing theories, I will argue that a Darwinian essence can be minimally (and properly) defined by three central principles constituting a tri­pod of necessary support, and specifying the fundamental meaning of a pow­erful system that Darwin famously described as the "grandeur in this view of life."

I shall then show that this formulation of Darwinian minimal commit­ments proves its mettle on the most vital ground of maximal utility. For not only do these three commitments build, in their ensemble, the full frame of a comprehensive evolutionary worldview, but they have also defined the chief objections and alternatives motivating all the most interesting debate within evolutionary theory during its initial codification in the 19th century. More­over, and continuing in our own time, these three themes continue to specify the major weaknesses, the places in need of expansion or shoring up, and the locus of unresolved issues that make evolutionary biology such a central and exciting subject within the ever changing and ever expanding world of mod­ern science.

### 1.2 The Structure of Evolutionary Theory: Revising the Three Central Features of Darwinian Logic

In the opening sentence of the Origin's final chapter (1859, p. 459), Darwin famously wrote that "this whole volume is one long argument." The pres­ent book, on "the structure of evolutionary theory," despite its extravagant length, is also a brief for an explicit interpretation that may be portrayed as a single extended argument. Although I feel that our best current formulation of evolutionary theory includes modes of reasoning and a set of mechanisms substantially at variance with strict Darwinian natural selection, the logical structure of the Darwinian foundation remains remarkably intact — a fasci­nating historical observation in itself, and a stunning tribute to the intel­lectual power of our profession's founder. Thus, and not only to indulge my personal propensities for historical analysis, I believe that the best way to ex­emplify our modern understanding lies in an extensive analysis of Darwin's basic logical commitments, the reasons for his choices, and the subsequent manner in which these aspects of "the structure of evolutionary theory" have established and motivated all our major debates and substantial changes since Darwin's original publication in 1859.1 regard such analysis not as an antiquarian indulgence, but as an optimal path to proper understanding of our current commitments, and the underlying reasons for our decisions about them.

As a primary theme for this one long argument, I claim that an "essence" of Darwinian logic can be defined by the practical strategy defended in the first section of this chapter: by specifying a set of minimal commitments, or broad statements so essential to the central logic of the enterprise that disproof of any item will effectively destroy the theory, whereas a substantial change to any item will convert the theory into something still recognizable as within the Bauplan of descent from its forebear, but as something sufficiently differ­ent to identify, if I may use the obvious taxonomic metaphor, as a new subclade within the monophyletic group. Using this premise, the long argu­ment of this book then proceeds according to three sequential claims that set the structure and order of my subsequent chapters:

1 Darwin himself formulated his central argument under these three basic premises. He understood their necessity within his system, and the difficulty that he would experience in convincing his contemporaries about such unfa­miliar and radical notions. He therefore presented careful and explicit de­fenses of all three propositions in the Origin. I devote the first substantive chapter (number 2) to an exegesis of the Origin of Species as an embodiment of Darwin's defense for this central logic.

2 As evolutionary theory experienced its growing pains and pursued its founding arguments in the late 19th and early 20th centuries (and also in its pre-Darwinian struggles with more inchoate formulations before 1859), these three principles of central logic defined the themes of deepest and most persistent debate — as, in a sense, they must because they constitute the most interesting intellectual questions that any theory for causes of descent with modification must address. The historical chapters of this book's first half then treat the history of evolutionary theory as responses to the three central issues of Darwinian logic (Chapters 3–7).

3 As the strict Darwinism of the Modern Synthesis prevailed and "hard­ened," culminating in the overconfidences of the centennial celebrations of 1959, a new wave of discoveries and theoretical reformulations began to challenge aspects of the three central principles anew — thus leading to an­other fascinating round of development in basic evolutionary theory, extend­ing throughout the last three decades of the 20th century and continuing to­day. But this second round has been pursued in an entirely different and more fruitful manner than the 19th century debates. The earlier questioning of Darwin's three central principles tried to disprove natural selection by offer­ing alternative theories based on confutations of the three items of central logic. The modern versions accept the validity of the central logic as a foun­dation, and introduce their critiques as helpful auxiliaries or additions that enrich, or substantially alter, the original Darwinian formulation, but that leave the kernel of natural selection intact. Thus, the modern reformula­tions are helpful rather than destructive. For this reason, I regard our modern understanding of evolutionary theory as closer to Falconer's metaphor, than to Darwin's, for the Duomo of Milan — a structure with a firm foundation and a fascinatingly different superstructure. (Chapters 8–12, the second half of this book on modern developments in evolutionary theory, treat this third theme.)

Thus, one might say, this book cycles through the three central themes of Darwinian logic at three scales — by brief mention of a framework in this chapter, by full exegesis of Darwin's presentation in Chapter 2, and by lengthy analysis of the major differences and effects in historical (Part 1) and modern critiques (Part 2) of these three themes in the rest of the volume.

The basic formulation, or bare-bones mechanics, of natural selection is a disarmingly simple argument, based on three undeniable facts (overproduc­tion of offspring, variation, and heritability)1 and one syllogistic inference (natural selection, or the claim that organisms enjoying differential reproduc­tive success will, on average, be those variants that are fortuitously better adapted to changing local environments, and that these variants will then pass their favored traits to offspring by inheritance). As Huxley famously, and ruefully, remarked (in self-reproach for failing to devise the theory him­self), this argument must be deemed elementary (and had often been formulated before, but in negative contexts, and with no appreciation of its power — see p. 137), and can only specify the guts of the operating machine, not the three principles that established the range and power of Darwin's rev­olution in human thought. Rather, these three larger principles, in defining the Darwinian essence, take the guts of the machine, and declare its simple operation sufficient to generate the entire history of life in a philosophical manner that could not have been more contrary to all previous, and cher­ished, assumptions of Western life and science.

The three principles that elevated natural selection from the guts of a working machine to a radical explanation of the mechanism of life's history can best be exemplified under the general categories of agency, efficacy, and scope. I treat them in this specific order because the logic of Darwin's own de­velopment so proceeds (as I shall illustrate in Chapter 2), for the most radical claim comes first, with assertions of complete power and full range of appli­cability then following.

Agency. The abstract mechanism requires a locus of action in a hierar­chical world, and Darwin insisted that the apparently intentional "benevo­lence" of nature (as embodied in the good design of organisms and the har­mony of ecosystems) flowed entirely as side-consequences of this single causal locus, the most "reductionistic" account available to the biology of Darwin's time. Darwin insisted upon a virtually exceptionless, single-level theory, with organisms acting as the locus of selection, and all "higher" order emerging, by the analog of Adam Smith's invisible hand, from the (unconscious) "strug­gles" of organisms for their own personal advantages as expressed in dif­ferential reproductive success. One can hardly imagine a more radical refor­mulation of a domain that had unhesitatingly been viewed as the primary manifestation for action of higher power in nature — and Darwin's brave and single-minded insistence on the exclusivity of the organismic level, although rarely appreciated by his contemporaries, ranks as the most radical and most distinctive feature of his theory.

Efficacy. Any reasonably honest and intelligent biologist could easily understand that Darwin had identified a vera causa (or true cause) in natural selection. Thus, the debate in his time (and, to some extent, in ours as well) never centered upon the existence of natural selection as a genuine causal force in nature. Virtually all anti-Darwinian biologists accepted the reality and action of natural selection, but branded Darwin's force as a minor and negative mechanism, capable only of the headsman's or executioner's role of removing the unfit, once the fit had arisen by some other route, as yet uniden­tified. This other route, they believed, would provide the centerpiece of a "real" evolutionary theory, capable of explaining the origin of novelties. Dar­win insisted that his admittedly weak and negative force of natural selection could, nonetheless, under certain assumptions (later proved valid) about the nature of variation, act as the positive mechanism of evolutionary novelty — that is, could "create the fit" as well as eliminate the unfit — by slowly accu­mulating the positive effects of favorable variations through innumerable generations.

Scope. Even the most favorably minded of contemporaries often admit­ted that Darwin had developed a theory capable of building up small changes (of an admittedly and locally "positive" nature as adaptations to changing environments) within a "basic type" — the equivalent, for example, of making dogs from wolves or developing edible corn from teosinte. But these critics could not grasp how such a genuine microevolutionary process could be ex­tended to produce the full panoply of taxonomic diversity and apparent "progress" in complexification of morphology through geological time. Dar­win insisted on full sufficiency in extrapolation, arguing that his micro-evolutionary mechanism, extended through the immensity of geological time, would be fully capable of generating the entire pageant of life's history, both in anatomical complexity and taxonomic diversity — and that no further causal principles would be required.

Because primates are visual animals, complex arguments are best portrayed or epitomized in pictorial form. The search for an optimal icon to play such a role is therefore no trivial matter (although scholars rarely grant this issue the serious attention so richly merited) — especially since the dangers of confu­sion, misplaced metaphor, and replacement of rigor with misleading "intu­ition" stand so high. I knew from the beginning of this work that I needed a suitable image for conveying the central logic of Darwinian theory. As one of my humanistic conceits, I hoped to find a historically important scientific im­age, drawn for a different reason, that might fortuitously capture the argu­ment in pictorial form. But I had no expectation of success, and assumed that I would need to commission an expressly designed figure drawn to a long list of specifications.

The specific form of the image — its central metaphorical content, if you will — plays an important role in channeling or misdirecting our thoughts, and therefore also requires careful consideration. In the text of this book, I speak most often of a "tripod" since central Darwinian logic embodies three major propositions that I have always visualized as supports — perhaps be­cause I have never been utterly confident about this entire project, and I needed some pictorial encouragement to keep me going for twenty years. (And I much prefer tripods, which can hold up elegant objects, to buttresses, which may fly as they preserve great Gothic buildings, but which more often shore up crumbling edifices. Moreover, the image of a tripod suits my major claim particularly well — for I have argued, just above, that we should define the "essence" of a theory by an absolutely minimal set of truly necessary propositions. No structure, either of human building or of abstract form, captures this principle better than a tripod, based on its absolute minimum of three points for fully stable support in the dimensional world of our physical experience.)

But organic images have always appealed more strongly, and I preferred a biological icon. If the minimal logic can be represented by a tripod pointing downward, then the same topology can be inverted into a structure growing upward. Darwin's own favorite image of the tree of life immediately sug­gested itself, and I long assumed that I would eventually settle on a botanical icon. But I also remembered Darwin's first choice for an organic metaphor or picture of branching to capture his developing views about descent with modification and the causes of life's diversity — the "coral of life" of his "B Note­book" on transmutation, kept during the 1830's as he became an evolutionist and struggled towards the theory of natural selection (see Barrett et al., 1987).

As I began to write this summary chapter, I therefore aimlessly searched through images of Cnidaria from my collection of antiquarian books in paleontology. I claim no general significance whatsoever for my good fortune, but after a lifetime of failure in similar quirky quests, I was simply stunned to find a preexisting image — not altered one iota from its original form, I promise you, to suit my metaphorical purposes — that so stunningly embodied my needs, not only for a general form (an easy task), but down to the smallest de­tails of placement and potential excision of branches (the feature that I had no right or expectation to discover and then to exapt from so different an original intent).

The following figure comes from the 1747 Latin version of one of the semi­nal works in the history of paleontology — the 1670 Italian treatise of the Sicilian savant and painter Agostino Scilla, ha vana speculazione disingan-nata dal senso ("Vain speculation undeceived by the senses" — Scilla's de­fense, at the outset of "the scientific revolution" of Newton's generation, for empirical methods in the study of nature, and specifically, in this treatise, for a scientific paleontology and the need to recognize fossils as remains of an­cient organisms, not as independent products of the mineral kingdom). This work, famous not only for an incisive text, but also for its beautiful plates (see Fig. 1-3), engraved by an author known primarily as an artist of substan­tial eminence, includes this figure, labeled Coralium articulatum quod copio-sissimum in rupibus et collibus Messanae reperitur ("Articulated coral, found in great abundance in the cliffs and hills of Messina").

This model, and its organic features, work uncommonly well as a meta­phor for the Goldilockean position of definition by a barest minimum of truly fundamental postulates. For Scilla's coral, with its branching structure (see Fig. 1-4) — particularly as expressed in the lessening consequences of excising branches at ever higher levels nearer the top (the analogs of disconfirming theoretical features of ever more specialized and less fundamental import) — so beautifully captures the nature and operation of the intellectual structure that I defended above for specifying the essences of theories. The uncanny ap­propriateness of Scilla's coral lies in the fortuity that this particular specimen (accurately drawn from nature by Scilla, I assume, and not altered to as­sert any general point) just happens to include exactly the same number of branches (three) as my Darwinian essential structure. (They terminate at the same upper level, so I could even turn the specimen over into a tolerably unwobbly tripod!) Moreover, since this particular genus of corals grows in discrete segments, the joining points correspond ideally with my metaphor of chopping planes for excising parts of structures at various levels of impor­tance in an intellectual entity. But, most incredibly, the segmental junctions of



1-3. The famous frontispiece from Scilla's treatise of 1670 defending the organic nature of fossils. The solid young man, representing the truth of sensory experi­ence, shows a fossil sea urchin in his right hand to a wraithlike figure represent­ing the former style of speculative thinking. With his left hand, the solid figure points to other fossils found in Sicily. The text proclaims: "Vain speculation un­deceived by the senses."


this particular specimen just happen to occupy the exact places that I needed a priori to make my central point about lower choppings that destroy theo­ries, middle choppings that change theories in a Falconerian way (major al­terations in structure upon a preserved foundation), and upper choppings that change theories in the lesser manner of Darwin's Milanese metaphor (smaller excisions that leave the framework intact as well).

The central trunk (the theory of natural selection) cannot be severed, or the creature (the theory) dies. (The roots, if you will, represent sources of evi­dence; any one may be excised, if recognized as incorrect by later study, so long as enough remain to anchor the structure). This central trunk then di­vides into a limited number of major branches. These basic struts — the three

1-4. Agostino Scilla was also a celebrated painter as well as a scien­tist. The plates of his 1670 trea­tise are therefore particularly well done. This figure, representing a fossil coral that Scilla found near Messina, fortuitously (and without any alteration whatsoever), pre­sents a detailed picture of the basic logic of Darwinian theory as recog­nized in this book. See text for details.



branches of the Darwinian essence in this particular picture — are also so es­sential that any severing of a complete branch either kills, or so seriously compromises, the entire theory that a new name and basic structure becomes essential.

We now reach the interesting point where excisions and regraftings pre­serve the essential nature of an intellectual structure, but with two quite dif­ferent levels of change and revision, as characterized by Falconer's and Dar­win's competing metaphors for the Duomo of Milan. I would argue that a severing low on any one of the three major branches corresponds with a revi­sion profound enough to validate the more interesting Falconerian version of major revision upon a conserved foundation. (The Falconerian model is, in this sense, a Goldilockean solution itself, between the "too much" of full de­struction and the "too little" of minor cosmetic revision.) On the other hand, the severing of a subbranch of one of the three branches symbolizes a less portentous change, closer to Darwinian models for the Milanese Duomo — an alteration of important visual elements, but without change in the basic framework.

My fascination with the current state of evolutionary theory, at least as I read current developments in both logic and empirics, lies in its close con­formity to the Falconerian model — with enough continuity to make the past history of the field so informative (and so persistently, even emotionally, compelling), but with enough deep difference and intellectual fascination to stim­ulate anyone with a thirst for the intriguing mode of novelty that jars previ­ous certainty, but does not throw a field into the total anarchy of complete rebuilding (not a bad thing either, but far from the actual circumstance in this case).

To summarize my views on the utility of such a model for the essence of Darwinian logic, I will designate three levels of potential cuts or excisions to this organic (and logical) coral of the structure of evolutionary theory, as originally formulated by Darwin in the Origin of Species, and as revised in a Falconerian way in recent decades. The most inclusive and most fundamental K-cuts (killing cuts) sever at least one of the three central principles of Dar­winian logic and thereby destroy the theory tout court. The second level of R-cuts (revision cuts) removes enough of the original form on one of the three central branches to ensure that the new (and stronger or more arborescent) branch, in regrowing from the cut, will build a theory with an intact Darwin­ian foundation, but with a general form sufficiently expanded, revised or re­constructed to present an interestingly different structure of general explana­tion — the Falconerian model for the Duomo of Milan. Finally, the third level of S-cuts (subsidiary cuts) affects only a subbranch of one of the three major branches, and therefore reformulates the general theory in interesting ways, while leaving the basic structure of explanation intact — the Darwinian model for the Duomo of Milan.

I wrote this book because I believe that all three pillars, branches, or tri­pod legs, representing the three fundamental principles of Darwinian central logic, have been subjected to fascinating R-cuts that have given us at least the firm outlines — for the revised structure of evolutionary explanation remains a work vigorously in progress, as only befits the nature of its subject, after all! — of a far richer and fascinatingly different theory with a retained Dar­winian core rooted in the principles of natural selection. In short, we live in the midst of a Falconerian remodeling of our growing and multiform, yet co­herently grounded, intellectual mansion.

I will not, in this chapter, detail the nature of the K-cuts that failed (thus preserving the central logic of Darwinism), the R-cuts that have succeeded in changing the structure of evolutionary theory in such interesting ways, and the S-cuts that have refurbished major rooms in particular wings of the edi­fice — for these specifications set the subject matter of all following chapters. But to provide a better opening sense of this book's argument — and to clarify the nature of the three central claims of Darwinian logic — I shall at least dis­tinguish, for each branch, the K-cuts that never prevailed (and therefore did not fell the structure) from the R-cuts that have affected each branch, and have therefore provoked our current process of building an enriched struc­ture for evolutionary theory.

Returning to Scilla's coral (Fig. 1-4), consider the central branch as the first leg of the tripod (agency, or the claim for organismal selection as the causal locus of the basic mechanism), the left branch as the second leg (efficacy, or the claim that selection acts as the primary creative force in building evo­lutionary novelties), and the right branch as the third leg (scope, or the claim that these microevolutionary modes and processes can, by extrapola­tion through the vastness of geological time, explain the full panoply of life's changes in form and diversity).

The cut labeled K1 on Figure 1-4 would have severed the entire coral by disproving natural selection as an evolutionary force at all. The cut labeled K2 would have fully severed the second branch, leaving natural selection as a legitimate cause, but denying it any creative role, and thereby dethroning Darwinism as a major principle in explaining life's history. (We shall see, in Chapters 3–6, that such a denial of creativity underlay the most common anti-Darwinian argument in the first generations of debate.) The cut labeled К3 would have fully severed the third branch, allowing that natural selection might craft some minor changes legitimately called "creative" in a local sense, but denying that Darwin's mechanism could then be extended to explain the panoply of macroevolutionary processes, or the actual pageant of life's his­tory. The success of any one of these K-cuts would have destroyed Darwinian theory, plain and simple. None of them succeeded, and the foundation of Darwinian central logic remains intact and strong.

In striking, and most positive, contrast, I believe that higher R-cuts — leav­ing the base of each major branch intact, but requiring a substantial regrowth and regrafting of an enlarged structure upon the retained foundation — have been successfully wielded against all three branches of Darwinian logic, as the structure of evolutionary theory developed in the last third of the 20th cen­tury (following too rigid a calcification of the original structure, a good ad­umbration of the coral metaphor!, in the hardening of the Modern Synthesis that culminated in the Darwinian centennial celebrations of 1959). On the first branch of agency, the cut labeled R1 (see Fig. 1-4) expanded Darwin's unilevel theory of organismal selection into a hierarchical model of selection acting simultaneously on several legitimate levels of Darwinian individuality (genes, cell-lineages, organisms, demes, species, and clades). I shall show in Chapters 3, 8, and 9 how the logic of this pronounced expansion builds a the­ory fascinatingly different from, and not just a smooth extension of, Darwin's single level mechanism of agency — my reason for portraying the hierarchical model as a deeply interesting R-cut rather than a more superficial S-cut.

On the second branch of efficacy, the cut labeled R2 accepts the validity of Darwin's argument for creativity (by leaving the base of the branch intact), but introduces a sufficient weight of formalist thinking — via renewed appre­ciation for the enormous importance of structural, historical, and develop­mental constraint in channeling the pathways of evolution, often in highly positive ways — that the pure functionalism of a strictly Darwinian (and ex­ternalist) approach to adaptation no longer suffices to explain the channeling of phyletic directions, and the clumping and inhomogeneous population of organic morphospace. The strict Darwinian form of explanation has thereby been greatly changed and enriched, but in no way defeated. I shall discuss the historical aspect of this branch in Chapters 4 and 5, and modern reformula­tions of this R2 cut in Chapters 10 and 11.

On the final branch of scope, the cut labeled R3 accepts the Darwinian contention that microevolutionary modes and principles can build grand pat­terns by cumulation through geological immensity, but rejects the argument that such extrapolations can render the entire panoply of phenomena in life's history without adding explicitly macroevolutionary modes for distinctive expression of these processes at higher tiers of time — as in the explanation of cladal trends by species sorting under punctuated equilibrium, rather than by extended adaptive anagenesis of purely organismal selection, and in the ne­cessity of titrating adaptive microevolutionary accumulation with occasional resetting of rules and patterns by catastrophically triggered mass extinctions at time's highest tier. Chapters 6 and 12 discuss historical and modern cri­tiques of Darwinian extrapolationism.

For now, I will say little about the even higher and more superficial S-cuts of subbranches, but I will at least indicate how I construe this category by stating a hypothetical example for each branch: an S1 cut, for example, might accept the selective basis of evolutionary change in a purely mechanical sense, but then deny full force to Darwin's deliciously radical philosophical claim that all apparent "higher level" harmony arises consequentially, through the invisible hand of lower levels acting for personal reproductive success. One might, in principle, propose such a revision by arguing that a higher force, operating by an overarching principle of order, "employs" natural selection as its mechanical agent. (I speak only hypothetically here, for no such defend­able scientific hypothesis now exists, although the concept certainly remains intelligible. Explicitly theological versions don't count as science, whatever their kind or form of potential validity.) An S2 cut might be assayed by a developmental saltationist who accepted the selectionist basis of adaptive change but felt that, at a sufficient relative frequency to be counted as impor­tant, the initial steps of such changes may be larger than the pure continuationism of Darwinian selection can admit. And an S3 cut might accept the full validity of microevolutionary extrapolationism, but deny the subsidiary de­fense of progress that Darwin grafted onto this apparatus (see Chapter 6) with ecological arguments about plenitude and the priority of biotic over abiotic competition.

As a paleontologist and part-time historian of science by profession, my reading of these important R-cuts arose from a macroevolutionary perspec­tive framed largely in terms of longstanding difficulties faced by Darwinism in extending its successes for explaining small changes in palpable time into equally adequate causal accounts for broader patterns and processes in geo­logical history. I have, in this effort, also benefited from my personal study of Darwin's life and times, and especially the late 19th century debates on mech­anisms of evolution (as promulgated largely by professionals who could nei­ther fully understand nor accept the radical philosophical commitments un­derlying Darwin's view). This historical study allowed me to grasp the continuity in basic themes from Darwin's own formulation, through these foundational debates, right down to the major theoretical struggles of our own time. An appreciation of this continuity allowed me to discern and de­fine the distinctively Darwinian view of life.

But I recognize only too well that every strength comes paired with weaknesses. In my case, a paleontological focus leads me into relative ignorance for an equally important locus of reform in the structure of Darwinism — in­creasing knowledge of the nature of genomes and the mechanics of develop­ment. (I try to cover the outlines of important theoretical critiques from this "opposite" realm of the smallest, but the relative weightings in my text reflect my own varying competencies far more than the merits of the cases. For ex­ample, although I do discuss, and perhaps even adequately outline, the im­portance of Kimura and King's neutralist theory in questioning previous as­sumptions of adaptationist hegemony, I surely do not give an appropriate volume of attention to this enormously important subject.)

Nonetheless, I hope that I have managed to present an adequate account of the coordinating themes that grant such interest and coherence to modern reformulations of the structure of evolutionary theory. Such thematic consis­tency in revision becomes possible largely because Darwin himself, in his characteristically brilliant way, tied the diverse threads of his initiating argu­ment into an overall view with a similarly tight structure — thus granting clear definition to his own commitments, and also permitting their revision in the form of an equally coherent "package." I would argue, moreover, and with­out wishing to become extravagantly hagiographical (for I wrote this book, after all, primarily to discuss a critique and revision of strict Darwinism), that our modern sense of limitations in the canonical version arises from decisions that Darwin made for tough and correct reasons in the context of his initiat­ing times — reasons that made his account the first operational theory of evolution in modern science. In particular, as Chapter 2 will discuss in detail, Darwin converted evolution from untestable speculation to doable science by breaking through the old paradox (as embedded most prominently in Lamarck's system) of contrasting a palpable force of small-scale change that could do little in extension, with a basically nonoperational (and orthogonal) mechanism of large-scale change putatively responsible for all the interesting patterns of life's history, but imperceptible and untestable from the uniformitarian study of modern organisms.

By claiming that the small-scale mechanics of modern change could, by extension, explain all of evolution, Darwin opened the entire field to empirical study. And yet, as Hegel and so many other students of change have noted, progress in human (and other) affairs tends to spiral upwards in cycles of pro­posal (thesis), then countered by opposition (antithesis), and finally leading to a new formulation combining the best aspects of both competitors (synthe­sis). Darwin's thesis established evolution as a science, but his essential com­mitments, as expressed in the three legs of his necessary logical tripod (or the three branches of his conceptual tree or coral, as in the alternate metaphor of Fig. 1-4), eventually proved too narrow and confining, thus requiring an an­tithesis of extension and reformulation on each branch, and leading — or so this book maintains as a central thesis of its own — to a still newer and richer synthesis expressing our best current understanding of the structure of evolu­tionary theory.

In fact, and to repeat my summary in this different form, one might encapsulate the long argument of this book in such a Hegelian format. Pre-Darwinian concepts of evolution remained speculative and essentially nonoperational, largely because (see Chapter 3) they fell into the disabling para­dox of contrasting an effectively unknowable large-scale force of cosmic progress against an orthogonal, palpable and testable small-scale force that could generate local adaptation and diversity, but that couldn't, in principle, explain the macroevolutionary pattern of life. Then Darwin, in his thesis (also an antithesis to these earlier sterile constructions), brilliantly argued that the putative large-scale force did not exist, and that all evolution could be explained by upward extrapolation from the small-scale force, now prop­erly understood as natural selection. In a first stage of debate during the late 19th and early 20th centuries (Chapters 3–6), most critiques of Darwinism — one might designate them as a first round of ultimately destructive antithe­ses — simply denied sufficient agency, efficacy and range to natural selection, and reasserted the old claim of duality, with selection relegated to triviality, and some truly contrary force sought as the explanation for major features of evolution. Strict Darwinism eventually fended off these destructive critiques, reasserted itself in the triumphant, and initially (and generously) pluralistic form of the Modern Synthesis, but eventually calcified into a "hardened" ver­sion (Chapter 7).

Then, in a strikingly different, and ultimately fruitful, second round of antitheses, a renewed debate about central theoretical issues arose during the last three decades of the 20th century, and reshaped the field by recognizing that selection needed to be amplified, reformulated and invigorated by other, noncontrary (and, at most, orthogonal) causes, not rejected as wrong, or scorned as trivial (Chapters 8–12). The one long argument of this book holds that a synthesis (still much in progress) has now sufficiently coagulated from this debate to designate our best current understanding of the structure of evolutionary theory as something rich and new, with a firmly retained basis in Darwinian logic — in other words, and following the organizing and opening metaphor of this chapter, as a validation of Falconer's, rather than Darwin's, concept of the historical growth and change of Milan's cathedral.

Ariel's telling verse in Shakespeare's The Tempest proclaims in dense metaphor:

Full fathom five thy father lies;

Of his bones are coral made;

Those are pearls that were his eyes:

Nothing of him that doth fade

But doth suffer a sea-change

Into something rich and strange.

With the exception of one possible (and originally unintended) modern reading of these images, this famous and haunting verse provides a beautiful description of both the priceless worth and intriguing modern transformation of Darwin's original theory. (For the exception, several connotations of deep burial in the sea — full fathom five — might be viewed negatively, as in "deep sixing" or going to Davy Jones's locker. But, for natural historians who read this book, and coming from an invertebrate paleontologist as author, the seafloor could not represent a more positive resting place or point of origin — and I intend to evoke only these upbeat images in citing Ariel's lines.) Other­wise, Darwin's original structure has only yielded greater treasure in cascad­ing implications and developments through the subsequent history of evolu­tionary thought — the conversion of the bones of an original outline into precious coral and pearls of current substance. Nothing of Darwin's central logic has faded or fully capsized, but his theory has been transformed, along his original lines, into something far different, far richer, and far more ade­quate to guide our understanding of nature.

The last three lines of Shakespeare's verse also appear on the tombstone of the great poet Percy Bysshe Shelley (also the author of the preface to his wife's novella, Frankenstein, which cites Erasmus Darwin in its first line of text). I believe that these words would suit, and honor, Charles Darwin just as well and just as rightly.

### Apologia Pro Vita Sua

A TIME TO KEEP

The Preacher spoke ever so truly in writing his famous words (Ecclesiastes 3:1-7): "For every thing there is a season, and a time to every purpose ... A time to break down, and a time to build up ... A time to rend, and a time to sew: a time to keep silence, and a time to speak." Evolutionary theory now stands in the happier second state of these genuine dichotomies (in part be­cause the first state had been mined to the limited extent of its utility): we live in a time for building up, for sewing together, and for speaking out.

Not all times are such good times, and not all scientists win the good for­tune to live within these times of motion. For theories grow as organisms do, with periods of Sturm und Drang, long latencies of youth or ossifications of age, and some happy times of optimally productive motion in between (an­other Goldilockean phenomenon). I recently studied the life and career of E. Ray Lankester (Gould, 1999a), clearly the most talented evolutionary morphologist of the generation just after Darwin. He did "good" work and had a "good" career (see Chapter 10, pages 1069–1076 for his best theoretical efforts), but he never transcended the ordinary. Perhaps the limitation lay largely within his own abilities. However, I rather suspect that he did possess both the temperamental gumption and the requisite intellectual might — but that the tools of major empirical advance just didn't emerge in his generation, for he remained stuck in a relatively unproductive middle, as Darwin had seized the first-fruits from traditional data of natural history, and the second plucking required a resolution of genetic mechanisms.

I felt a similar kind of frustration in 1977, after writing my first technical book, Ontogeny and Phylogeny (see Chapter 10, pages 1061–1063). I had spent the best years of a young career on a subject that I knew to be rele­vant (at a time when most of the profession had forgotten). But then defeat snatched my prize from the jaws of victory. I am proud of the book, and I do believe that it helped to focus interest on a subject that became doable soon thereafter. But I ran up against a wall right at the end — for the genetics of de­velopment clearly held the key to any rapprochement of embryology and evo­lution, and we knew effectively nothing about eukaryotic regulation. Indeed, as we could then only characterize structural genes by electrophoretic tech­niques, our major "arguments" for regulatory effects (if they even merited such a positive designation) invoked such negative evidence as the virtual identity in structural genes between chimps and humans, coupled with a fair visceral sense of extensive phenotypic disparity in anatomy and behavior — with the differences then attributed to regulatory genes that we could not, at the time, either study or even identify.

By sheer good fortune (abetted in minuscule ways by my own pushes and those of my paleontological colleagues), the field moved fast and I lived long enough to witness a sea change (if I may cite Ariel yet again) towards potentiation on all three major intellectual and social substrates for con­verting a subject from great promise combined with even more frustrating inoperability, into a discipline bursting with new (and often utterly surpris­ing) data that led directly to testable hypotheses about basic issues in the structure of evolutionary theory.

Empirics. During the last third of the 20th century, new techniques and conceptualizations opened up important sources of data that challenged orthodox formulations for all three branches of essential Darwinian logic. To cite just one relevant example for each branch, theoretical development and accumulating data on punctuated equilibrium allowed us to reconceptualize species as genuine Darwinian individuals, fully competent to participate in processes of selection at their own supraorganismic (and suprademal) level — and then to rethink macroevolution as the differential success of species rather than the extended anagenesis of organismal adaptation (see Chapter 9). This validation of the species-individual aided the transformation of what had begun as a particular argument about group (or interdemic) selection into a fully generalized hierarchical theory, with good cases then documented from the genic to the cladal level (see Chapter 8).

On the second branch of full efficacy for natural selection as an externalist and functionalist process, the stunning discoveries of extensive deep homologies across phyla separated by more than 500 million years (particularly the vertebrate homologs of arthropod Hox genes) — against explicit statements by architects of the Modern Synthesis (see p. 539) that such homologies could not exist in principle, in a world dominated by their conception of nat­ural selection — forced a rebalancing or leavening of Darwinian functionalism with previously neglected, or even vilified, formalist perspectives based on the role of historical and structural constraints in channeling directions of evolu­tionary change, and causing the great dumpings and inhomogeneities of morphospace — phenomena that had previously been attributed almost exclu­sively to functionalist forces of natural selection.

On the third branch of extrapolation, the discovery and relatively quick validation, beginning in 1980, of a truly catastrophic trigger for at least one great mass extinction (the K-T event of 65 million years ago), fractured the uniformitarian consensus, embraced by a century of paleontological compla­cency, that all apparent faunal overturns could be "spread out" into sufficient time for explanation by ordinary causes under plausible intensifications that would not alter conventional modes of evolution and extinction.

Moreover, as we shall see, these three apparently rather different kinds of data and their attendant critiques cohere into a revised general structure for evolutionary theory — thus marking our age as a time for building up and not only as a time for breaking down.

Concepts. Following the Kantian dictum that percepts without con­cepts are blind, but concepts without percepts empty, these two categories interpenetrate as "pure" data suggest novel ideas (how can one not rethink the causes of mass extinction when evidence surfaces for a bolide, 7-10 km in diameter, and packing 104 the megatonnage of all the earth's nuclear weapons combined), whereas "abstract" concepts then taxonomize the natural world in different ways, often "creating" data that had never been granted enough previous intellectual space even to be conceived (as when punctuated equilib­rium made stasis a theoretically meaningful and interesting phenomenon, and not just an embarrassing failure to detect "evolution," in its traditional definition of gradual change — and paleontologists then began active stud­ies of a subject that had previously been ignored as uninteresting, if conceptualized at all). But, speaking parochially as a student of the fossil record, I can at least say that the conceptual revolution in macroevolutionary thinking re­vitalized the field of paleobiology (even creating the name as a subdiscipline of paleontological endeavor). Whatever the varied value of different individ­ual efforts in this burgeoning field, we may at least be confident that our pro­fession will no longer be humiliated as a synecdoche for ossified boredom among the natural sciences — as Nature did in 1969 when editorializing about the salutary value of plate tectonics in revitalizing the geological sciences: "Scientists in general might be excused for assuming that most geologists are paleontologists and most paleontologists have staked out a square mile as their life's work. A revamping of the geologist's image is badly needed" (Anonymous, 1969, p. 903).

The intricate and multifaceted concepts that have nuanced and altered the central logic on all three branches of Darwinism's essential postulates repre­sent ideas of broad ramification and often remarkably subtle complexity, as we vain scientists soon discovered in our fractured bubbles of burst pride — for we had been so accustomed to imagining that an evening in an armchair could conquer any merely conceptual issue, whereas we all acknowledge the substantial time and struggle that empirical problems, demanding collection and evaluation of data, often require. Yet, on these basic questions in formu­lating evolutionary theory, we often read and thought for months, and ended up more confused than when we began.

The general solution to such procedural dilemmas lies in a social and intellectual activity that scientists do tend to understand and practice better than colleagues in most other academic disciplines — collaboration. Far more than most colleagues, I have tended to work alone in my professional life and pub­lication. But for each of the conceptually difficult and intellectually manifold issues of reevaluation for the central logic of the three essential Darwinian postulates, I desperately needed advice, different skills, and the give and take of argument, from colleagues who complemented my limited expertise with their equally centered specialties and aptitudes for other aspects of these large and various problems. Thus, on the first leg or branch of hierarchy theory, I worked with Niles Eldredge on punctuated equilibrium, and with Elisabeth Vrba on levels of selection and sorting. On the second leg of structuralist al­ternatives to adaptationist argument, I worked with Dick Lewontin on span­drels, Elisabeth Vrba on exaptation, David Woodruff on the functional and structural morphology of Cerion, and with "the gang of four" (increased to five with the later inclusion of Jack Sepkoski) — Dave Raup, Tom Schopf, Dan Simberloff, and me — on trying to specify how many aspects of apparently or­dered phyletic patterns, heretofore confidently attributed to selection for little reason beyond the visual appearance of order itself, could plausibly be gener­ated within purely random systems. And on the third leg of extrapolationism, my earliest interests in the logic and justification of uniformitarianism in phi­losophy, and of Lyellian perspectives in the history of science, could not have developed without advice and substantial aid (but not collaborative publica­tion this time) with historians Martin Rudwick, Reijer Hooykaas, and Cecil Schneer, and with philosophers Nelson Goodman, Bonnie Hubbard, and George Geiger. (Geiger, my mentor at Antioch College, was the last student of John Dewey and played with Lou Gehrig on the Columbia University base­ball team, thus embodying both my professional and avocational interests.)

In fact, and as a comment within the sociology of science, I would venture that future historians might judge the numerous seminal (and published) collaborations between evolutionary biologists and professional philosophers of science as the most unusual and informative operational aspect of the reconstruction of evolutionary theory in the late 20th century. Research scientists tend to be a philistine lot, with organismic biologists perhaps at the head of this particular pack (for we work with "big things" that we can see and un­derstand at our own scale. Thus, we suppose that we can afford to be more purely empirical in our reliance on "direct" observation, and less worried about admittedly conceptual problems of evaluating things too small or too fast to see). Most of us would scoff at the prospect of working with a profes­sional philosopher, regarding such an enterprise as, at best, a pleasant waste of time and, at worst, an admission that our own clarity of thought had be­come addled (or at least as a fear that our colleagues would so regard our in­terdisciplinary collaboration).

And yet, the conceptual problems presented by theories based on causes operating at several levels simultaneously, of effects propagated up and down, of properties emerging (or not) at higher levels, of the interaction of random and deterministic processes, and of predictable and contingent influ­ence, have proven to be so complex, and so unfamiliar to people trained in the simpler models of causal flow that have served us well for centuries (see the next section on Zeitgeist), that we have had to reach out to colleagues ex­plicitly trained in rigorous thinking about such issues. Thus, we learned, to our humbling benefit, that conceptual muddles do not necessarily resolve themselves "automatically" just because a smart person — namely one of us, trained as a scientist — finally decides to apply some raw, naive brain power to the problem. Professional training in philosophy does provide a set of tools, modes and approaches, not to mention a feeling for common dangers and fal­lacies, that few scientists (or few "smart folks" of any untrained persuasion) are likely to possess by the simple good fortune of superior raw brainpower. (We might analogize this silly and vainglorious, although regrettably com­mon, belief to the more popular idea that great athletes should be able to ex­cel at anything physical by reason of their general bodily virtue — a myth and chimaera that dramatically exploded several years ago when Michael Jordan discovered that he could not learn to hit a curve ball, just because he excelled so preeminently in basketball, and possessed the world's best athletic body in general — for he ended up barely hitting over 0.200 in a full season of minor league play. I do, however, honor and praise his persistence in staying the course and taking his lumps.)

Indeed, I know of no other substantial conceptual advance in recent science so abetted by the active collaboration of working scientists and professional philosophers (thus obviating, for once, the perennial, and justified, complaint of philosophers of science that no scientists read their journals or even en­counter their analyses). Several key achievements in modern evolutionary theory, particularly the successful resolution of conceptual difficulties in for­mulating a workable theory of hierarchical selection (rooted in concepts like emergence and simultaneous selection at several levels that our minds, with their preferences for two-valued logics, don't handle either automatically, or well at all), have appeared as joint publications of biologists and philoso­phers, including the books of Sober and Wilson, 1998, and Eldredge and Grene, 1992; and articles of Sober and Lewontin, 1982, and Mayo and Gilinsky, 1987. My own understanding of how to formulate an operational theory of hierarchical selection, and my "rescue" from a crucial conceptual error that had stymied my previous thinking (see Chapter 8, pages 656–673), emerged from joint work with Elisabeth Lloyd, a professional philosopher of science. I take great pride in our two joint articles (Lloyd and Gould, 1993; Gould and Lloyd, 1999), which, in my partisan judgment, resolve what may have been the last important impediment to the codification of a conceptually coherent and truly operational theory of hierarchical selection.

Zeitgeist. Although major revisions to the structure of evolutionary theory emerged mainly from the conventional substrates of novel data and clearer concepts, we should not neglect the admittedly fuzzier, but by no means unimportant, input from a distinctive social context, or intellectual "spirit of the times" (a literal meaning of Zeitgeist) that, at the dawn of a calendrical millennium, has suffused our general academic culture with a set of loosely coherent themes and concerns far more congenial with the broad revisions here proposed within evolutionary theory than any previous set of guiding concepts or presuppositions had been. Needless to say, Zeitgeists are two edged swords of special sharpness — for either they encourage sheeplike conformity with transient ghosts of time (another literal meaning of Zeitgeist) that will soon fade into oblivion, or they open up new paths to insights that previous ages could not even have conceptualized. Any intellectual would therefore be a fool to argue that conformity with a Zeitgeist manifests any preferential correlation with scientific veracity ipso facto. Zeitgeists can only suggest or facilitate.

Nonetheless, we would be equally foolish in our naive empiricism if we claimed that major advances in science must be entirely data driven, and that social contexts can only act as barriers to our vision of nature's factuality. Both the social and scientific world were "ready" for evolution in the mid 19th century. People of equal intelligence could neither have formulated nor owned such a concept in Newton's generation, even if some hypothetical Dar­win had then advanced such a claim (and probably ended up in Bedlam for his troubles). In Chapter 2, I shall document not only this general readiness of Western science within the Zeitgeist of Darwin's time, but also the specific so­cial impetus that Darwin gained from studying the distinctive theories (also a product of the earlier Enlightenment Zeitgeist, and not accessible before) of Adam Smith and the Scottish economists. Thus, and by analogy a century later, the altered Zeitgeist of our own time may also facilitate a fruitful reconsideration of major evolutionary concepts that still bear the originating stamp of a Victorian scientific context strongly committed to unidirectional, single-level and deterministic views of natural causality — subtly controlling con­cepts that many scientists would now label as limiting and outmoded.

Although the next few paragraphs will be the most vague and impressionis­tic (I trust) of the entire book, I venture these ill-formulated statements about Zeitgeist because I feel that something important lurks behind my inability to express these inchoate thoughts with precision. I argue above (page 14) that the key concerns of the three essential branches of Darwinian logic might be identified as agency, efficacy and scope of natural selection. In each of these domains, I believe, the revised structure of evolutionary theory, as presented in this book, might be characterized as expansion and revision according to a set of coordinated principles, all consonant with our altered Zeitgeist vs. the scientific spirit of Darwin's own time. The modern revision seeks to replace Darwin's unifocal theory of organismic selection with a hierarchical account (leg one); his unidirectional theory of adaptational construction in the func­tionalist mode with a more balanced interaction of these external causes, treating internal (or structural) constraints primarily as positive channels, and not merely as limitations (leg two); and his unilevel theory of micro-evolutionary extrapolation with a model of distinctive but interacting modes of change, each characteristic for its tier of time. In short, a hierarchy of inter­acting levels, each important in a distinctive way, for Darwin's single locus; an interaction of environmental outsides with organic insides for Darwin's single direction of causal flow; and a set of distinctive temporal tiers for Dar­win's attempt to situate all causality in the single microevolutionary world of our own palpable moments.

I do sense a common underlying vision behind all these proposed reforms. Strict Darwinism, although triumphant within mid 20th century evolutionary theory, embodied several broad commitments (philosophical or metatheoretical, in the technical sense of these terms), more characteristic of 19th than of 20th century thought (and, obviously, not necessarily wrong, or even to be discounted, for this reason — as nothing can be more dangerous to the prog­ress of science than winds of fashion, and we do, after all, learn some things, and develop some fruitful approaches, with validity and staying power well beyond their time of origin and initial popularity). Some aspects of Darwin's formulation broke philosophical ground in a sense quite consonant with our modern Zeitgeist of emphasis upon complexity and interaction — particularly, Darwin's focus on the interplay of chance and necessity in sources of varia­tion vs. mode of selection. Indeed, Darwin paid the usual price for such inno­vation in the failure of nearly all his colleagues, even the most intellectually acute, to grasp such a radical underlying philosophy. But, in many command­ing respects, Darwinism follows the norms of favored scientific reasoning in his time.

The logic of Darwin's formulation rests upon several preferences in scien­tific reasoning more characteristic of his time than of ours — preferences that many scientists would now view as unduly restrictive in their designation of a privileged locus of causality, a single direction of causal flow, and a smooth continuity in resulting effects. Classical Darwinism follows standard reduc­tionist preferences in designating the lowest level then available — the organ­ism, for Darwin — as an effectively unique locus of causality (the first leg of agency). In this sense, the efforts of Williams and Dawkins (see Chapter 8) to reduce the privileged locus even further to the genic level (perforce unavail­able to Darwin) should be read as a furthering and intensification of Darwin's intent — in other words, a basically conservative adumbration of Darwin's own spirit and arguments, and not the radical conceptual revision that some have imagined.

At this single level of causality, classical Darwinism then envisages a similarly privileged direction of causal flow, as information from the environment (broadly construed, of course, to include other organisms as well as physical surroundings) must impact the causal agent (organisms struggling for repro­ductive success) and be translated, by natural selection, into evolutionary change. The organism supplies raw material in the form of "random" varia­tion, but does not "push back" to direct the flow of its own alteration from inside. Darwinism, in this sense, is a functionalist theory, leading to local ad­aptation as the environment proposes and natural selection disposes. Finally, classical Darwinism completes a trio of privileged causal places and conse­quently directional flows by postulating strict continuity in results, as local selection scales smoothly through the immensity of geological time to engen­der life's history by pure extrapolation of lowest-level modes and causes.

By contrast, the common themes behind the reformulations defended in this book all follow from serious engagement with complexity, interaction, multiple levels of causation, multidirectional flows of influence, and pluralis­tic approaches to explanation in general — a set of integrated approaches that strongly contribute to the Zeitgeist of our moment. To anticipate and make a preemptive strike against the obvious counterattack from Darwinian tradi­tionalists, these alternative themes do not substitute a "laid back, laissez-faire, anything goes" kind of sloppy tolerance for contradiction and fuzziness in argument against the genuine rigor of old-line Darwinism. The social and psychological contributions of a Zeitgeist to the origin of hypotheses bear no logical relationship to any subsequent scientific defense and validation of the same hypotheses. Moreover, on this subject of test and confirmation, I es­pouse a rigorously conventional and rather old-fashioned "realist" view that an objective factual world exists "out there," and that science can access its ways and modes. Whatever the contribution of a Victorian Zeitgeist to Darwin's thinking, or of a contemporary Zeitgeist to our revisions, the dif­ferences are testable and subject to validation or disproof by the usual arma­mentarium of scientific methods. That is, either Darwin is right and effec­tively all natural selection occurs at the organismic level (despite the logical conceivability of other levels), or the hierarchical theory is right and several levels make interestingly different and vitally important simultaneous contributions to the overall pattern of evolution. The same ordinary form of testability can be applied to any other contrast between strict Darwinism and the revised and expanded formulations defended in this book.

As the most striking general contrast that might be illuminated by reference to the different Zeitgeists of Darwin's time and our own, modern revisions for each essential postulate of Darwinian logic substitute mechanics based on in­teraction for Darwin's single locus of causality and directional flow of effects. Thus, for Darwin's near exclusivity of organismic selection, we now propose a hierarchical theory with selection acting simultaneously on a rising set of levels, each characterized by distinctive, but equally well-defined, Darwinian individuals within a genealogical hierarchy of gene, cell-lineage, organism, deme, species, and clade. The results of evolution then emerge from complex, but eminently knowable, interactions among these potent levels, and do not simply flow out and up from a unique causal locus of organismal selection.

A similar substitution of interaction for directional flow then pervades the second branch of selection's efficacy, as Darwin's functionalist formulation — with unidirectional flow from an external environment to an isotropic or­ganic substrate that supplies "random" raw material but imposes no direc­tional vector of its own to "push back" from internal sources of constraint — yields to a truly interactive theory of balance between the functionalist Dar­winian "outside" of natural selection generated by environmental pressures, and a formalist "inside" of strong, interesting and positive constraints gen­erated by specific past histories and timeless structural principles. Finally, on the third and last branch of selection's range, the single and control­ling microevolutionary locus of Darwinian causality yields to a multileveled model of tiers of time, with a unified set of processes working in distinctive and characteristic ways at each scale, from allelic substitution in observable years to catastrophic decimation of global biotas. Thus, and in summary, for the unifocal and noninteractive Darwinian models of exclusively organismal selection, causal flow from an environmental outside to an organismal in­side, and a microevolutionary locus for mechanisms of change that smoothly extrapolate to all scales, we substitute a hierarchical selectionist theory of numerous interacting levels, a balanced and bidirectional flow of causal­ity between external selection and internal constraint (interaction of func­tionalist and structuralist perspectives), and causal interaction among tiers of time.

Among the many consequences of these interactionist reformulations, punctuational rather than continuationist models of change (with stronger structuralist components inevitably buttressing the punctuational versions) may emerge as the most prominent and most interesting. The Darwinian me­chanics of functionalism yield an expectation of continuously improving lo­cal adaptation, with longterm stability representing the achievement of an optimum. But interactionist and multi-leveled models of causality reconcep­tualize stasis as a balance, actively maintained among potentially competing forces at numerous levels, with change then regarded as exceptional rather than intrinsically ticking most of the time, and punctuational rather than smoothly continuous when it does occur (representing the relatively quick transition that often accompanies a rebalancing of forces).

To end this admittedly vague section with the punch of paradox (and even with a soundbite), I would simply note the almost delicious irony that the for­mulation of a hierarchical theory of selection — the central concept of this book, and invoking a non-vernacular meaning of hierarchy in the purely structural sense of rising levels of inclusivity — engenders, as its most impor­tant consequence, the destruction of a different and more familiar meaning of hierarchy: that is, the hierarchy of relative value and importance embod­ied in Darwin's privileging of organismic selection as the ultimate source of evolutionary change at all scales. Thus, a structural and descriptive hierarchy of equally effective causal levels undermines a more conventional hierarchy of relative importance rooted in Darwin's exclusive emphasis on the micro-evolutionary mechanics of organismal selection. And so, this structuralist view of nature's order enriches the structure of evolutionary theory — carry­ing the difference between strict Darwinism and our current understanding through more than enough metatheoretical space to fashion a Falconerian, not merely a Darwinian, rebuilding and extension for our edifice of coherent explanation.