Schumpeter, J. A., The Theory of Economic Development (1912), Oxford University Press, London, 1961.

Schumpeter, J. A., History of Economic Analysis, Allen and Unwin, London, 1954.

Shackle, G. L. S., Uncertainty in Economics, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, 1955.

Shackle, G. L. S., Epistemics and Economics, Transaction Publishers, Piscataway, NJ, 1992.

Simpson, D., Rethinking Economic Behaviour, St. Martin's Press, New York, 2002.

Smolin, L.,「Time and Symmetry in Models of Economic Markets,」Mss., Feb 2009.

Smolin, L., Time Reborn. Houghton, Mifflin, Harcourt, New York, 2013.

Solow, R.,「Technical Change and the Aggregate Production Function,」Rev. Economics and Statistics, 39, 312–320, 1957.

Soros, G., The Alchemy of Finance, Simon & Schuster, New York, 1987.

Tabb, W., Reconstructing Political Economy, Routledge, New York, 1999.

Tesfatsion, L., and K. L. Judd, eds., Handbook of Computational Economics: Vol.2. Agent-Based Computational Economics, North-Holland Elsevier, New York, 2006.

Tesfatsion, L.,「Agent-Based Computational Economics: A Constructive Approach to Economic Theory,」in Tesfatsion and Judd, op. cit., 2006.

Turing, A. M.,「On Computable Numbers, with an Application to the Entscheidungsproblem,」Proc. London Math. Society, Series 2, 42, 1936.

Waldrop, M., Complexity, Simon & Schuster, New York, 1992.

Watts, D.,「A Simple Model of Global Cascades on Random Networks,」PNAS, 9, 5766–5771, 2002.

Wolfram, S., A New Kind of Science, Wolfram Media, Champaign, IL, 2002.

第 02 章　「爱尔法鲁酒吧」问题

Arthur, W. Brian.「On Learning and Adaptation in the Economy.」Santa Fe Institute (Santa Fe, NM) Paper 92-07-038, 1992.

Bower, Gordon H., and Hilgard, Ernest R. Theories of learning. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1981.

De Groot, Adriann. Thought and choice in chess, Psychological Studies, No. 4. Paris: Mouton, 1965.

Feldman, Julian.「Computer Simulation of Cognitive Processes,」in Harold Borko, ed., Computer applications in the behavioral sciences. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1962, pp. 336-359.

Grannan, E. R., and Swindle, G. H.「Contrarians and Volatility Clustering.」Santa Fe Institute (Santa Fe, NM) Paper 94-03-010, 1994.

Holland, John H., Holyoak, Keith J., Nisbett, Richard E., and Thagard, Paul R. Induction. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1986.

Koza, John. Genetic programming. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1992.

Rumelhart, David.「Schemata: The Building Blocks of Cognition,」in R. Spiro,B. Bruce, and W. Brewer, eds., Theoretical issues in reading comprehension. Hillside, NJ: Erlbaum, 1980, pp. 33–58.

Sargent, Thomas J. Bounded rationality in macroeconomics. New York: Oxford University Press, 1994.

Schank, R., and Abelson, R. P. Scripts, plans, goals, and understanding: An inquiry into human knowledge structures. Hillside, NJ: Erlbaum, 1977.

第 03 章　圣塔菲人工股票市场

W. B. Arthur (1992),「On Learning and Adaptation in the Economy,」Working Paper 92-07-038, Santa Fe Institute, Santa Fe, NM.

W. B. Arthur (1994),「Inductive Behavior and Bounded Rationality,」Amer. Econ.Rev., 84, pp. 406–411.

W. B. Arthur (1995),「Complexity in Economic and Financial Markets,」Complexity, 1, pp. 20–25.

A. Beltratti-S. Margarita (1992),「Simulating an Artificial Adaptive Stock Market,」mimeo, Turin University.

L. Blume-D. Easley (1982),「Learning to Be Rational,」J. Econ. Theory, 26, pp.340–351.

L. Blume-D. Easley (1990),「Evolution and Market Behavior,」J. Econ. Theory, 58, pp. 9–40.

T. Bollerslev-R. Y. Chou-N. Jayaraman-K. F. Kroner (1990),「ARCH Modeling in Finance: A Review of the Theory and Empirical Evidence,」J. Econometrics, 52, pp. 5–60.

P. Bossaerts (1995),「The Econometrics of Learning in Financial Markets,」Econometric Theory, 11, pp. 151–189.

M. Bray (1982),「Learning, Estimation, and Stability of Rational Expectations,」J. Econ. Theory, 26, pp. 318–339.

W. Brock-J. Lakonishok-B. LeBaron (1991),「Simple Technical Trading Rules and the Stochastic Properties of Stock Returns,」Working Paper 91-01-006, Santa Fe Institute, Santa Fe, NM.

W. Brock-C. H. Hommes (1996),「Models of Complexity in Economics and Finance,」mimeo, Department of Economics, University of Wisconsin, Madison.

D. M. Cutler-J. M. Poterba-L. H. Summers (1989),「What Moves Stock Prices?,」J. Portfolio Mgmt., 15, pp. 4–12.

J. B. De Long-A. Shleifer-L. H. Summers-R. J. Waldmann (1990a),「Noise Trader Risk in Financial Markets,」J. Pol. Econ., 98, pp. 703–738.

J. B. De Long-A. Shleifer-L. H. Summers-R. J. Waldmann (1990b),「Positive Feedback Strategies and Destabilizing Rational Speculation,」J. Fin., 45, pp. 379–395.

J. B. De Long-A. Shleifer-L. H. Summers-R. J. Waldmann (1991),「The Survival of Noise Traders in Financial Markets,」J. Bus., 64, pp. 1–18.

B. T. Diba-H. I. Grossman (1988),「The Theory of Rational Bubbles in Stock Prices,」Econ. Jour., 98, pp. 746–754.

M. Eigen-P. Schuster (1979), The Hypercycle: A Principle of Natural Self-Organization, Springer, New York.

E. F. Fama-K. R. French (1988),「Permanent and Temporary Components of Stock Market Prices,」J. Pol. Econ., 96, pp. 246–273.

J. A. Frankel-K. A. Froot (1990),「Chartists, Fundamentalists, and Trading in the Foreign Exchange Market,」AEA Papers & Proc., 80, pp. 181–185.

D. Friedman-M. Aoki (1992),「Inefficient Information Aggregation as a Source of Asset Price Bubbles,」Bull. Econ. Res., 44, pp. 251–279.

C. A. E. Goodhart-M. O’Hara (1995),「High Frequency Data in Financial Markets: Issues and Applications,」Unpublished manuscript, London School of Economics.

E. R. Grannan-G. H. Swindle (1994),「Contrarians and Volatility Clustering,」Working Paper 94-03-010, Santa Fe Institute, Santa Fe, NM.

S. J. Grossman (1976),「On the Efficiency of Competitive Stock Markets Where Traders Have Diverse Information,」J. Fin., 31 pp. 573–585.

S. J. Grossman-J. Stiglitz (1980),「On the Impossibility of Informationally Efficient Markets,」Amer. Econ. Rev., 70, pp. 393–408.

J. H. Holland-K. J. Holyoak-R. E. Nisbett-P. R. Thagard (1986), Induction, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.

S. Kauffman (1993), The Origin of Order: Self-Organization and Selection in Evolution, Oxford University Press, New York.

J. M. Keynes (1936), General Theory of Employment, Interest, and Money, Macmillan, London.

A. Kirman (1991),「Epidemics of Opinion and Speculative Bubbles in Financial Markets,」in Money and Financial Markets, M. Taylor (ed.), Macmillan, London.

A. W. Kleidon (1986),「Anomalies in Financial Economics: Blueprint for Change?,」J. Bus., 59, pp. 285–316 (supplement).

M. Kurz (1994),「On the Structure and Diversity of Rational Beliefs,」Econ. Theory, 4, pp. 877–900.

M. Kurz (1995),「Asset Prices with Rational Beliefs,」Working Paper 96-003, Economics Department, Stanford University.

S. F. Leroy-R. D. Porter (1981),「Stock Price Volatility: Tests Based on Implied Variance Bounds,」Econometrica, 49, pp. 97–113.

A. W. Lo-C. Mackinlay (1988),「Stock Prices Do Not Follow Random Walks: Evidence from a Simple Specification Test,」Rev. Fin. Stud., 1, pp. 41–66.

R. E. Lucas (1978),「Asset Prices in an Exchange Economy,」Econometrica, 46, pp. 1429–1445.

L. Marengo-H. Tordjman (1995),「Speculation, Heterogeneity, and Learning: A Model of Exchange Rate Dynamics,」Working Paper WP-95-17, IIASA.

P. Milgrom-N. Stokey (1982),「Information, Trade, and Common Knowledge,」J. Econ. Theory, 26, pp. 17–27.

R. Nelson-S. Winter (1982), An Evolutionary Theory of Economic Change, Harvard University, Press/Bellknap, Cambridge, MA.

R. G. Palmer-W. B. Arthur-J. H. Holland-B. Lebaron-P. Tayler (1994),「Artificial Economic Life: A Simple Model of a Stockmarket,」Physica D, 75, pp. 264–274.

J. M. Poterba-L. H. Summers (1988),「Mean Reversion in Stock Prices: Evidence and Implications,」J. Fin. Econ., 22, pp. 27–59.

C. Rieck (1994),「Evolutionary Simulation of Asset Trading Strategies,」in Many-Agent Simulation and Artificial Life, E. Hillenbrand and J. Stender (eds.), IOS Press, Washington, DC.

D. E. Rumelhart (1977), Human Information Processing, Wiley, New York.

T. J. Sargent (1993), Bounded Rationality in Macroeconomics, Oxford University Press, New York.

R. Schank-R. P. Abelson (1977), Scripts, Plans, Goals, and Understanding, Erlbaum, Hillsdale, NJ.

R. J. Shiller (1981),「Do Stock Prices Move Too Much to Be Justified by Subsequent Changes in Dividends?,」Amer. Econ. Rev., 71, pp. 421–436.

R. J. Shiller (1989), Market Volatility, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.

A. Shleifer-L. H. Summers (1990),「The Noise Trader Approach to Finance,」J. Econ. Perspectives, 4, pp. 19–33.

G. Soros (1994), The Theory of Reflexivity, Soros Fund Management, New York.

L. H. Summers (1986),「Does the Stock Market Rationally Reflect Fundamental Values?,」J. Fin., 46, pp. 591–601.

R. H. Thaler (1993), Advances in Behavioral Finance, Russell Sage Foundation, New York.

M. Youssefmir-B. Huberman (1995),「Clustered Volatility in Multiagent Dynamics,」Working Paper 95-05- 051, Santa Fe Institute, Santa Fe, NM.

第 04 章　收益递增和路径依赖

Agnew, H. (1981).「Gas-cooled nuclear power reactors.」Scientific American, vol. 244, pp. 55–63.

Arthur, W. B. (1983).「Competing technologies and lock-in by historical small events: the dynamics of allocation under increasing returns.」International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis Paper WP-83-92, Laxenburg, Austria. (Center for Economic Policy Research, Paper 43, Stanford).

Arthur, W. B. (1984).「Competing technologies and economic prediction.」Options, International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis, Laxenburg, Austria. No.1984/2, pp. 10–13.

Arthur, W. B., Ermoliev, Yu, and Kaniovski, Yu. (1983).「On generalized urn schemes of the polya kind.」Kibernetika, vol. 19, pp. 49–56. English translation in Cybernetics, vol. 19, pp. 61–71.

Arthur, W. B., Ermoliev, Yu, and Kaniovski, Yu. (1986).「Strong laws for a class of path-dependent urn processes.」In Proceedings of the International Conference on Stochastic Optimization, Kiev 1984, Springer Lecture Notes Control and Information Sciences, vol. 81, pp. 187–300.

