## 记忆时间

## 卡片

### 0101. 反常识卡——

这本书的主题核心，就是最大的反常识卡，并且注意时间脉络。

#### 01. 常识

#### 02. 反常识

#### 03. 知识来源

比如提出者，如何演化成型的；书或专栏具体出现的地方。

#### 04. 例子

### 0201. 术语卡——last-mile problem

Gaps between business and technology types aren’t new, but this divide runs deeper. Consider that 105 years ago, before coding and computers, Willard Brinton began his landmark book Graphic Methods for Presenting Facts by describing the last-mile problem: “Time after time it happens that some ignorant or presumptuous member of a committee or a board of directors will upset the carefully-thought-out plan of a man who knows the facts, simply because the man with the facts cannot present his facts readily enough to overcome the opposition.…As the cathedral is to its foundation so is an effective presentation of facts to the data.”

### 0202. 术语卡——

### 0203. 术语卡——

### 0301. 人名卡——

根据这些证据和案例，找出源头和提出术语的人是谁——产生一张人名卡，并且分析他为什么牛，有哪些作品，生平经历是什么。

维基百科链接：有的话。

#### 01. 基本信息

用一句话描述你对这个大牛的印象。

#### 02. 贡献及著作

### 0401. 金句卡——

最后根据他写的非常震撼的话语——产生一张金句卡。

### 0501. 行动卡——

行动卡是能够指导自己的行动的卡。

### 0601. 任意卡——

最后还有一张任意卡，记录个人阅读感想。

## 模板

### 1. 逻辑脉络

用自己的话总结主题，梳理逻辑脉络，也就是在这个专栏的整个地图里，这一章节所在的节点。

### 2. 摘录及评论

1『自己的观点』

2『行动指南』

3『与其他知识的连接』

## 20190212Data-Science-and-the-Art-of-Persuasion.md

### Idea in Brief

THE PROBLEM. Companies responded to the analytics boom by hiring the best data scientists they could find—but many of them haven’t gotten the value they expected from their data science initiatives.

THE ROOT CAUSE. For an analytics project to create value, the team must first ask smart questions, wrangle the relevant data, and uncover insights. Second, it must figure out—and communicate—what those insights mean for the business. The ability to do both is extremely rare—and most data scientists are trained to do the first, not the second.

THE SOLUTION. A good data science team needs six talents: project management, data wrangling, data analysis, subject expertise, design, and storytelling. The right mix will deliver on the promise of a company’s analytics.

---

It’s working—to a point. Data has begun to change our relationship to fields as varied as language translation, retail, health care, and basketball. Executives complain about how much money they invest in data science operations that don’t provide the guidance they hoped for. They don’t see tangible results because the results aren’t communicated in their language.

But despite the success stories, many companies aren’t getting the value they could from data science. Even well-run operations that generate strong analysis fail to capitalize on their insights. Efforts fall short in the last mile, when it comes time to explain the stuff to decision makers.

In a question on Kaggle’s 2017 survey of data scientists, to which more than 7,000 people responded, four of the top seven “barriers faced at work” were related to last-mile issues, not technical ones: “lack of management/financial support,” “lack of clear questions to answer,” “results not used by decision makers,” and “explaining data science to others.” Those results are consistent with what the data scientist Hugo Bowne-Anderson found interviewing 35 data scientists for his podcast; as he wrote in a 2018 HBR.org article.

2『去找 Hugo Bowne-Anderson 的那篇文章。』

In my work lecturing and consulting with large organizations on data visualization (dataviz) and persuasive presentations, I hear both data scientists and executives vent their frustration. Data teams know they’re sitting on valuable insights but can’t sell them. They say decision makers misunderstand or oversimplify their analysis and expect them to do magic, to provide the right answers to all their questions. Executives, meanwhile, complain about how much money they invest in data science operations that don’t provide the guidance they hoped for. They don’t see tangible results because the results aren’t communicated in their language.

1『双方都不满。』

Gaps between business and technology types aren’t new, but this divide runs deeper. Consider that 105 years ago, before coding and computers, Willard Brinton began his landmark book Graphic Methods for Presenting Facts by describing the last-mile problem: “Time after time it happens that some ignorant or presumptuous member of a committee or a board of directors will upset the carefully-thought-out plan of a man who knows the facts, simply because the man with the facts cannot present his facts readily enough to overcome the opposition.…As the cathedral is to its foundation so is an effective presentation of facts to the data.”

1『last-mile problem，这个概念做张术语卡片。』

How could this song remain the same for more than a century? Like anything else this deeply rooted, the lastmile problem’s origins are multiple. For one, the tools used to do the science include visualization functionality. This encourages the notion that it’s the responsibility of the data person to be the communicator. The default output of these tools can’t match well-conceived, fully designed dataviz; their visualization often isn’t as well developed as their data manipulation, and the people using the tools often don’t want to do the communicating. Many data scientists have told me they’re wary of visualization because it can dumb down their work and spur executives to draw conclusions that belie the nuance and uncertainty inherent in any scientific analysis. But in the rush to grab in-demand data scientists, organizations have been hiring the most technically oriented people they can find, ignoring their ability or desire (or lack thereof) to communicate with a lay audience.

That would be fine if those organizations also hired other people to close the gap—but they don’t. They still expect data scientists to wrangle data, analyze it in the context of knowing the business and its strategy, make charts, and present them to a lay audience. That’s unreasonable. That’s unicorn stuff.

To begin solving the last-mile problem, companies must stop looking for unicorns and rethink what kind of talent makes up a data science operation. This article proposes a way for those that aren’t getting the most out of their operations to free data scientists from unreasonable expectations and introduce new types of workers to the mix. It relies on cross-disciplinary teams composed of members with varying talents who work in close proximity. Empathy, developed through exposure to others’ work, facilitates collaboration among the types of talent. Work is no longer passed between groups; it’s shared among them.

A team approach—hardly new, but newly applied—can get data science operations over the last mile, delivering the value they’ve created for the organization.

1『解决办法：delivering the value they’ve created for the organization. 』

### 01. Why Are Things Like This?

In the early 20th century, pioneers of modern management ran sophisticated operations for turning data into decisions through visual communication, and they did it with teams. It was a cross-disciplinary effort that included gang punch operators, card sorters, managers, and draftsmen (they were nearly always men). Examples of the results of this collaboration are legion in Brinton’s book. Railroad companies and large manufacturers were especially adept, learning the most efficient routes to send materials through factories, achieving targets for regional sales performances, and even optimizing vacation schedules.

The team approach persisted through most of the century. In her 1969 book Practical Charting Techniques, Mary Eleanor Spear details the ideal team—a communicator, a graphic analyst, and a draftsman (still mostly men)—and its responsibilities. “It is advisable,” Spear writes, “that [all three] collaborate.”

In the 1970s things started to split. Scientists flocked to new technology that allowed them to visualize data in the same space (a computer program) where they manipulated it. Visuals were crude but available fast and required no help from anyone else. A crack opened in the dataviz world between computer-driven visualization and the more classic design-driven visualization produced by draftspeople (finally).

Chart Wizard, Microsoft’s innovation in Excel, introduced “click and viz” for the rest of us, fully cleaving the two worlds. Suddenly anyone could instantly create a chart along with overwrought variations on it that made bars three-dimensional or turned a pie into a doughnut. The profoundness of this shift can’t be overstated. It helped make charts a lingua franca for business. It fueled the use of data in operations and eventually allowed data science to exist, because it overcame the low limit on how much data human designers can process into visual communication. Most crucially, it changed the structure of work. Designersdraftspeople—were devalued and eventually fell out of data analysis. Visualization became the job of those who managed data, most of whom were neither trained to visualize nor inclined to learn. The speed and convenience of pasting a Chart Wizard graphic into a presentation prevailed over slower, more resource-intensive, design-driven visuals, even if the latter were demonstrably more effective.

With the advent of data science, the expectations put on data scientists have remained the same—do the work and communicate it—even as the requisite skills have broadened to include coding, statistics, and algorithmic modeling. Indeed, in HBR’s landmark 2012 article on data scientist as the sexiest job of the 21st century, the role is described in explicitly unicornish terms: “What abilities make a data scientist successful? Think of him or her as a hybrid of data hacker, analyst, communicator, and trusted adviser. The combination is extremely powerful—and rare.”

A rare combination of skills for the most sought-after jobs means that many organizations will be unable to recruit the talent they need. They will have to look for another way to succeed. The best way is to change the skill set they expect data scientists to have and rebuild teams with a combination of talents.

### How Communication Fails

I’ve learned in my work that most leaders recognize the value data science can deliver, and few are satisfied with how it’s being delivered. Some data scientists complain that bosses don’t understand what they do and underutilize them. Some managers complain that the scientists can’t make their work intelligible to a lay audience. In general, the stories I hear follow one of these scenarios. See if you recognize any of them.

1『有兴趣的话详见原文。』

### 02. Building a Better Data Science Operation

An effective data operation based on teamwork can borrow from Brinton and Spear but will account for the modern context, including the volume of data being processed, the automation of systems, and advances in visualization techniques. It will also account for a wide range of project types, from the reasonably simple reporting of standard analytics data (say, financial results) to the most sophisticated big data efforts that use cutting-edge machine learning algorithms. Here are four steps to creating one:

### 01

Define talents, not team members. It might seem natural that the first step toward dismantling unicorn thinking is to assign various people to the roles the “perfect” data scientist now fills: data manipulator, data analyst, designer, and communicator. Not quite. Rather than assign people to roles, define the talents you need to be successful. A talent is not a person; it’s a skill that one or more people possess. One person may have several talents; three people may be able to handle five talents. It’s a subtle distinction but an important one for keeping teams nimble enough to configure and reconfigure during various stages of a project. (We’ll come back to this.)






Any company’s list of talents will vary, but a good core set includes these six:

Project management. Because your team is going to be agile and will shift according to the type of project and how far along it is, strong PM employing some scrumlike methodology will run under every facet of the operation. A good project manager will have great organizational abilities and strong diplomacy skills, helping to bridge cultural gaps by bringing disparate talents together at meetings and getting all team members to speak the same language.

Data wrangling. Skills that compose this talent include building systems; finding, cleaning, and structuring data; and creating and maintaining algorithms and other statistical engines. People with wrangling talent will look for opportunities to streamline operations—for example, by building repeatable processes for multiple projects and templates for solid, predictable visual output that will jump-start the information-design process.

Data analysis. The ability to set hypotheses and test them, find meaning in data, and apply that to a specific business context is crucial—and, surprisingly, not as well represented in many data science operations as one might think. Some organizations are heavy on wranglers and rely on them to do the analysis as well. But good data analysis is separate from coding and math. Often this talent emerges not from computer science but from the liberal arts. The software company Tableau ranked the infusion of liberal arts into data analysis as one of the biggest trends in analytics in 2018. Critical thinking, context setting, and other aspects of learning in the humanities also happen to be core skills for analysis, data or otherwise. In an online lecture about the topic, the Tableau research scientist Michael Correll explained why he thinks infusing data science with liberal arts is crucial. “It’s impossible to consider data divorced from people,” he says. “Liberal arts is good at helping us step in and see context. It makes people visible in a way they maybe aren’t in the technology.”

Subject expertise. It’s time to retire the trope that data science teams are stuck in the basement to do their arcane work and surface only when the business needs something from them. Data science shouldn’t be thought of as a service unit; it should have management talent on the team. People with knowledge of the business and the strategy will inform project design and data analysis and keep the team focused on business outcomes, not just on building the best statistical models. Joaquin Candela, who runs applied machine learning at Facebook, has worked hard to focus his team on business outcomes and to reward decisions that favor those outcomes over improving data science.

Design. This talent is widely misunderstood. Good design isn’t just choosing colors and fonts or coming up with an aesthetic for charts. That’s styling—part of design, but by no means the most important part. Rather, people with design talent develop and execute systems for effective visual communication. In our context, they understand how to create and edit visuals to focus an audience and distill ideas. Informationdesign talent—which emphasizes understanding and manipulating data visualization—is ideal for a data science team.

Storytelling. Narrative is an extremely powerful human contrivance and one of the most underutilized in data science. The ability to present data insights as a story will, more than anything else, help close the communication gap between algorithms and executives. “Storytelling with data,” a tired buzz phrase, is widely misunderstood, though. It is decidedly not about turning presenters into Stephen Kings or Tom Clancys. Rather, it’s about understanding the structure and mechanics of narrative and applying them to dataviz and presentations.










