## PREAMBLE: THE DAY MY REALITY SPLIT INTO TWO 
In February of 2016 I began to experience two separate realities at the same time. 

In one reality, candidate for president Donald Trump had just ended his chances of becoming president of the United States by refusing to disavow the KKK, and David Duke, on a CNN interview with Jake Tapper. Trump said he didn’t hear the question. 

This was a big problem for candidate Trump. It was also a big problem for me. I was one of the earliest public figures to have predicted Trump’s win, and I was in the middle of an unplanned career pivot from “guy who created the Dilbert comic” to something like a political pundit. My blog traffic went through the roof whenever I wrote about Trump’s skill as a persuader. I don’t know much about politics, but I know skillful persuasion when I see it. As it turned out, there was a big demand for what I called my “persuasion filter” on the race. Producers for news outlets both large and small were scrambling to get me on their shows. I wrote and spoke so much about Trump’s persuasion skills that people labeled me a Trump supporter, although not in the sense of supporting his policies. By then my writing about Trump had already cost me half of my friends. My lucrative speaking career had dropped to zero, and I didn’t expect any new Dilbert licensing deals. I had become toxic for any kind of mixed crowd. But I was okay with my situation because I expected to be right in my prediction that Trump would win it all. Winning fixes most problems. Although the polls disagreed with me, I thought my prediction of a Trump win was looking good until the Jake Tapper interview on CNN. In this version of reality, I had foolishly alienated my friends, annihilated my professional reputation, and cut my income in half. And all I would get in return was a Wikipedia entry under my name saying I had supported an alleged racist for president. The situation was less than ideal.

I publicly disavowed Trump because of his CNN interview, just to get out of the blast zone. But by then it was too late to salvage everything I had already lost. Like an idiot, I had managed to turn a respected career as one of the top cartoonists in the country into a grimy embarrassment that wouldn’t wash off. That was one version of reality. I experienced a second version of reality at the same time. This version involved Trump brushing off the CNN/ KKK controversy and going on to win the presidency. In that version of reality I would be redeemed in the end, at least in terms of being a credible political observer. Winning always feels good. For the next several months I lived both realities. But I trusted only one of them. I doubled down on my prediction of a Trump win. If that sounds crazy to you, well, that’s nothing. We’re just getting started. There’s plenty more crazy in this book.

INTRODUCTION (WHERE I PRIME YOU FOR THE REST) I’m a trained hypnotist. And I’m going to tell you about the spookiest year of my life. It happened between June 2015 and November 2016. Okay, that’s a little more than a year. Everything you are about to read in this book is true, as far as I know. I don’t expect you to believe all of it. (Who could?) But I promise it is true, to the best of my knowledge. I’ve waited decades to deliver the message in this book. I waited because the world wasn’t ready, but also because the messenger—yours truly—didn’t have the skill to deliver it right. The story was too hard to tell. But it was important, and it needed to be told. And so I waited. And I learned. And I practiced. And I waited some more. Then it happened. On June 16, 2015, Donald J. Trump rode a golden elevator in Trump Tower to the lobby, where he announced his candidacy for president of the United States. Like most observers at the time, I didn’t fully understand what I was seeing. It wasn’t until the first Republican primary debate that I realized what was happening right before our eyes. Trump was no ordinary politician. He was no ordinary businessperson either. In fact, he wasn’t ordinary in any sense of the word. Trump is what I call a Master Persuader. That means he has weapons-grade persuasion skills. Based on my background in that field, I recognized his talents early. And after watching him in action during the election, I have to say that Trump is the most persuasive human I have ever observed. President Trump carried those persuasion skills into the White House, where his supporters say he has gotten a lot done, and his


critics say he hasn’t. Supporters pointed to a decrease in illegal immigration, a strong stock market (at this writing), high consumer confidence, progress fighting ISIS, a solid Supreme Court nominee, and a stronger-than-expected foreign policy game. Critics saw “chaos” in the administration, slow progress on health-care reform, and maybe some kind of nefarious connections with Russia. President Trump’s critics (and mine) asked me how I could call the president a Master Persuader when his public approval levels were in the cellar. The quick answer is that low approval didn’t stop him from winning the presidency. And according to his supporters, it didn’t stop him from getting things done on the job. His persuasion skills, combined with the power of the presidency, were all he needed. Keep in mind that disapproving of Trump’s style and personality is a social requirement for people who long for a more civil world. Effectiveness is a separate issue from persuasive skill. But here’s the fun part: I also believed that Trump—the Master Persuader—was going to do far more than win the presidency. I expected Trump to rip a hole in the fabric of reality so we could look through it to a deeper truth about the human experience. And he did exactly that. But not everyone noticed. That’s why I made it the theme of this book. The common worldview, shared by most humans, is that there is one objective reality, and we humans can understand that reality through a rigorous application of facts and reason. This view of the world imagines that some people have already achieved a fact-based type of enlightenment that is compatible with science and logic, and they are trying to help the rest of us see the world the “right” way. As far as I can tell, most people share that interpretation of the world. The only wrinkle with that worldview is that we all think we are the enlightened ones. And we assume the people who disagree with us just need better facts, and perhaps better brains, in order to agree with us. That filter on life makes most of us happy—because we see ourselves as the smart ones—and it does a good job of predicting the future, but only because confirmation bias (our tendency to interpret data as supporting our views) will make the future look any way we want it to look, within reason. What I saw with Trump’s candidacy for president is that the “within reason” part of our understanding about reality was about to change, bigly. I knew that candidate Trump’s persuasion skills were about to annihilate the public’s ability to understand what they were


seeing, because their observations wouldn’t fit their mental model of living in a rational world. The public was about to transition from believing—with total certainty—“ the clown can’t win” to “Hello, President Trump.” And in order to make that transition, they would have to rewrite every movie playing in their heads. To put it in simple terms, the only way Trump could win was if everything his critics understood about the true nature of reality was wrong. Then Trump won. That’s what I mean by “ripping a hole in the fabric of the universe.” Think of it as the moment your entire worldview dissolves in front of your eyes, and you have to rebuild it from scratch. As a trained persuader, I found this situation thrilling beyond words. And I was about to get a lot of company, once people realized what they were seeing. I’ll help you find the hole that Trump punched through the universe so you can look through it with me to the other side. Put a seat belt on your brain—you’re going to need it. Before we go further, I need to tell you that Trump’s stated policies during the campaign did not align with my political preferences. Nor do my views line up with Clinton’s stated policies during the race. I realize this is hard to believe, so I’ll need to give you some examples to make the point. This little detour is necessary so you can judge my political bias. It is important context because the message is always connected to the messenger. If you are a regular reader of my blog, you can probably skip this part. I label myself an ultraliberal, and by that I mean liberals seem too conservative to me. I’ll give you some examples: Generally speaking, conservatives want to ban abortion while liberals want it to remain legal. I go one step further and say that men should sideline themselves from the question and follow the lead of women on the topic of reproductive health. (Men should still be in the conversation about their own money, of course.) Women take on most of the burden of human reproduction, including all of the workplace bias, and that includes even the women who don’t plan to have kids. My personal sense of ethics says that the people who take the most responsibility for important societal outcomes should also have the strongest say. My male opinion on women’s reproductive health options adds nothing to the quality of the decision. Women have it


covered. The most credible laws on abortion are the ones that most women support. And when life-and-death issues are on the table, credibility is essential to the smooth operation of society. My opinion doesn’t add credibility to the system. When I’m not useful, I like to stay out of the way. Generally speaking, conservatives are opposed to legalization of marijuana whereas liberals are more likely to support it. I go one step further and suggest that doctors prescribe recreational drugs for old people to make their final years enjoyable. What do they have to lose? (Yes, I’m serious. I know it’s hard to tell.) When it comes to complicated issues about economics and foreign affairs, my opinion is that I never have enough data to form competent opinions. Neither does anyone else. My opinion of my own limitations doesn’t match that of any politician. They pretend they have enough information to make informed decisions. Generally speaking, conservatives think we live in a country where everyone already has equal opportunity. Liberals generally think the government should do more to guarantee equal opportunity. I go one step further and suggest considering slavery reparations for African Americans in the form of free college and job training, funded by a twenty-five-year tax on the top 1 percent. In the long run, I want free education for all, but you have to start someplace. No matter who goes first, it will seem unfair to everyone else. So why not let African Americans in low-income families go first? Keep in mind that helping the demographic group that is in the deepest hole gives society the biggest economic bang for the buck. And when society is prosperous, most of it flows right back into the pockets of the 1 percent, making their taxes for this purpose almost an investment. PERSUASION TIP 1 When you identify as part of a group, your opinions tend to be biased toward the group consensus. I hope those are enough examples to make my point. I’m not on any political team, and I like it that way. Policies aside, I was clearly a Trump “supporter” in the sense that I spoke glowingly of his persuasion skills, his humor, and his business


business talent. I was among the first observers—some say the first—to identify his political maneuvering as solid strategies borrowed from the business world. I was making that point while most pundits were labeling him an unhinged clown. I know a lot about business because I’ve observed it, and lived it, in a lot of ways. I write about business in the Dilbert comic, and I’ve published several business humor books. I also spent sixteen years in corporate America, first at a large bank and later at a phone company. I held about a dozen different jobs at those companies and got to see business from the perspective of technologists, marketers, strategists, leaders, followers, and more. I also have a BA in economics and an MBA from the Haas School of Business at UC Berkeley. And I’ve managed several different types of businesses of my own. The Dilbert business is a substantial enterprise, and I manage that. I also cofounded a start-up called WhenHub, and I help manage that. I make no claim of being a great businessperson, but I can usually tell the difference between good business practices and bad. Political pundits and writers covering Trump during the campaign generally did not have business experience, and I think that put them at a huge disadvantage in understanding the power of his methods. It wasn’t all about persuasion. He also used high-end business strategy all the way, and you wouldn’t recognize it as such if you had never spent time in that world. As I grew my number of social media followers by attracting Trump supporters, it was fun to play to the audience. They liked pro-Trump humor and content and I enjoyed delivering it. The funniest observers of the election seemed to be on the political right. I’m attracted to funny. I did sometimes criticize Trump, and I sometimes praised Clinton when her persuasion game was good. But I made no attempt at balancing the two for the sake of appearances. The mainstream media was doing a good job of covering all of the candidates’ flaws and features. My primary interest was the topic of persuasion. And on that dimension, Trump owned the election until the summer of 2016. That’s when Clinton’s persuasion game went weapons grade and it became a fair fight for the first time. If you would like to see my list of Trump’s mistakes, I’ve organized them in appendix D. I did that so you won’t think I’m blind to his

missteps. This is a good place to tell you where my credentials rank in the field of persuasion. I label my persuasion skills commercial grade, meaning I successfully use persuasion in my work. A few levels above me in talent and credibility are cognitive scientists who study this sort of thing for a living. If a cognitive scientist tells you I got something wrong in this book, trust the scientist, not me. In my view of the world, the few individuals I call Master Persuaders are a level above cognitive scientists in persuasion power and possess what I call weapons-grade persuasion skills. The qualities that distinguish weapons-grade persuasion from the academic or commercial types are the level of risk taking and the personality that goes with it. Trump the candidate had an appetite for risk, a deep understanding of persuasion, and a personality that the media couldn’t ignore. He brought the full package. Here’s the summary of the persuader types. The most powerful are at the top. Master Persuaders (includes several presidents, Steve Jobs, Peggy Noonan, Tony Robbins, Madonna, etc.) Cognitive scientists Commercial-grade persuaders (people such as me) I’ll try to compensate for my lack of a PhD in cognitive science by linking to sources where it makes sense. But much of this book is based on decades of personal practice and observation of what works and what doesn’t in the realm of persuasion. I encourage readers to remain skeptical and to check any of my claims on their own. A simple Google search will confirm (or debunk?) almost anything I say in this book about persuasion. BUT SCOTT, TRUMP IS A HORRIBLE MONSTER, ISN’T HE? Trump’s critics were appalled that I could say anything positive about this horrible monster that they expected to sprout horns at any moment. To them, my so-called support of Trump represented a big risk for the country, and it was the most despicable thing I could do. They worried that my writing would help get this racist, sexist, disrespectful, xenophobic hater elected. And they asked me how I could live


with myself as Hitler’s Little Helper. Wasn’t I taking a risk with the future of the entire planet? Was I putting everyone’s life in danger just to have some fun and get some attention? The simple answer is that I didn’t see any of their concerns as real. In Trump I saw a highly capable yet flawed man trying to make a positive difference. And I saw all of his opponents’ fears as the product of heavy-handed political persuasion. No one becomes Hitler at age seventy. We would have seen lots of warning signs during his decades of public life. And I kept in mind that most Republican candidates for president have been painted with the same Hitler brush, and it hasn’t been right yet. In a similar fashion, I knew President Obama was not part of an Islamic terrorist sleeper cell, as some of his critics claimed. I saw candidate Trump as the target of the same sort of partisan hysteria. Like much of the public, I saw a scary extremism in Trump’s language and policy preferences during the campaign. But I recognized his hyperbole as weapons-grade persuasion that would change after the election, not a sign that Trump had suddenly turned into Hitler. When Trump said he would deport millions of undocumented immigrants who were otherwise obeying the law, his critics saw it as the beginning of a Hitler-like roundup of the people who are “different” in some way. I saw it as a thoroughly impractical idea that served as a mental “anchor” to brand Trump as the candidate who cared the most about our porous borders and planned to do the most about them. Never mind that his initial deportation plan was mean, impractical, and—many would say—immoral. Trump’s position gave him plenty of room to negotiate back to something more reasonable after he was in office. That’s exactly what happened, even if you don’t like where he ended up. As I write this, President Trump’s current immigration policy is focused on deporting undocumented immigrants who committed serious crimes after entering. His critics probably felt relieved because his opening offer (mass deportation) was so aggressive that his current policy seems more reasonable than it might have without the opening offer for contrast. That is classic deal making. You start with a big first demand and negotiate back to your side of the middle. When candidate Trump answered questions about policies, it was clear he didn’t have a detailed understanding of the more complicated issues. Most observers saw this as a fatal flaw that would keep him out of the White House. I didn’t see it that way. I saw it as Trump recognizing that people don’t use facts and reason to

make decisions. A skilled persuader can blatantly ignore facts and policy details so long as the persuasion is skillful. Candidate Trump matched the emotional state of his base, and matched their priorities too. His supporters trusted him to dig into the details once elected, with the help of advisers and experts. And that’s what happened. I was far from being a true believer about Trump’s policies. But unlike most of the world, I recognized his campaign promises as more persuasion than policy. I never took his policy positions too seriously except in a directional sense. And directionally, Trump wanted the same things the public wanted: strong national security, prosperity, affordable health care, personal freedom, and that sort of thing. Although Trump never said it directly, he branded himself as a flexible leader who would work out the details after election. And sure enough, we observed President Trump working out the details after election on immigration policy, health care, taxes, fighting ISIS, and more. President Trump’s policy evolution was generally in the service of moving toward the political middle, as presidents generally do, creating haters on the right as well as the left. My point is that I wasn’t invested in Trump’s stated policies because I assumed he would drift toward the acceptable middle once he was elected. And that’s what we saw. He backed off on mass deportation of undocumented immigrants, waterboarding terrorists, killing the families of terrorists, and calling China a currency manipulator. He educated himself enough on climate change to decide that the Paris climate accord was a bad agreement no matter what anyone thought of the science. On social issues, Trump favored leaving those decisions with the individual states, which is a Republican form of moderation even if you don’t like the outcome. People have asked if I was really as confident in Trump’s win as I claimed I was. The answer is that I did feel confident in my prediction, to such a degree that it seemed puzzling even to me. I had lots of reasons for my prediction, as you will see throughout the book. But those reasons were not enough to justify my oversized confidence that Trump would win. Clearly there were some irrational processes going on in my mind that made me confident in an outcome that no rational person should have been confident about. I describe some of those influences in the last part of the book. The short version is that I was detecting patterns that all pointed in the same direction. But all of that could have been confirmation bias or magical thinking. There were a few times during the campaign—usually after Trump

did something spectacularly provocative—where my confidence was challenged. In every case, my confidence bounced back quickly, with one exception: the Access Hollywood “Pussygate” tapes, in which Trump was caught saying shocking things about his experiences with women. For several days I thought that scandal would be the end of Trump. But even that wasn’t enough to keep my irrational confidence in a Trump win from returning. You’ll read more about this later in the book. I made a point of sampling the election news on both sides of the political spectrum. I’m not sure how common that practice is. Most people are habit bound to the news sources that tend to agree with them. The voters who were consuming only left-leaning news were convinced Trump was a monster. The voters consuming conservative news were convinced that Hillary Clinton was evil incarnate. If you don’t sample the news on both sides, you miss a lot of the context. For example, when candidate Trump allegedly mocked a writer with a bad arm, the anti-Trump press played the video on loop to portray Trump as a bad person. But over at the conservative news sites, and on Twitter, you could see older videos of Trump using the same mocking hand gestures in other situations. Apparently he routinely makes the same “spastic” impression when mocking the opinions of his critics. If you watched only liberal-leaning news, you processed that situation as Trump mocking a disabled guy for his disability. That monster! But conservatives saw the context, understood the mocking as being generic, and correctly labeled it as so-called fake news. I saw the news coverage on both sides, so I wasn’t worried we might elect a president who mocks people’s disabilities. When Trump’s critics accused him of laziness, ignorance, and cruel intentions, I saw a skilled persuader who knew what mattered and what didn’t. Apparently he was more right than wrong on his priorities, because he won the election. Had I seen signs that the worst accusations against Trump were even 1 percent likely to be true, I would have backed off my support. But as a trained persuader, I saw the scariest accusations against Trump as routine political persuasion, not an indication that Hitler was coming. I never had a moment of doubt on this point. Based on my lifetime of experience with persuasion, the situation was both simple and clear: It only looked risky to the untrained. WHY I COULD SEE (AND SAY) WHAT OTHER

PUNDITS COULD NOT I had an advantage in explaining Trump to the public because I have an unusual talent stack. For starters, I’m a trained hypnotist and a lifelong student of persuasion. Trained persuaders recognize the techniques used by other persuaders in a way that the untrained do not. So I had that going for me. As I mentioned, I was also among the first (or the first) to point out that Trump was using high-end business strategy that looked crazy to political pundits who had no business experience. I have extensive business experience across a variety of fields, so most of what Trump was doing looked familiar to me. For example, where others saw Trump pushing outrageously impractical and even immoral policies, I saw him using standard negotiating tactics and hyperbole to make it easier to find the middle ground later. And he did. Like Trump, I grew up in New York State. That helped me understand his communication style. The provocative things Trump said during the campaign shocked much of the country. But to New Yorkers such as me, talking in a way that sounds unnecessarily provocative—as Trump often did during the campaign—is what New Yorkers call “talking.” My claim is that it is easier for a New Yorker to understand another New Yorker than it is for a Californian to understand a New Yorker. I had a lot of advantages in understanding Trump’s communication style and his powers of persuasion. But when it came to communicating what I knew, I had one enormous advantage that almost no one else covering the election had: I wasn’t doing it for the money. I’m already rich. No one owns me. The common business term for that situation is having F-you money. And I have it. That gave me the freedom to say whatever I thought was both useful and true. And thanks to my popular blog at Dilbert.com, I had a direct channel to the public. I also knew there would be plenty of haters coming at me as soon as I started saying good things about Trump’s talents. And come after me they did—amateurs, professionals, and paid trolls alike. Luckily for me, I had a three-word philosophy beginning with F and ending with “money” that covered that situation. And I made sure my readers knew that’s how I was thinking. The freedom to say whatever I wanted to say—and to do it publicly—was half the fun. Oh, I also have one more thing going for me: I don’t feel shame or embarrassment like normal people. I wasn’t always this way. It’s

a learned skill. And I knew it would take all of my embarrassment-avoidance talents to survive what I expected would be a year of abuse at best, and at worst—if my critics were right—a lifetime of mockery for the things I was about to say in public. That kind of risk has never stopped me from doing anything. I confess to enjoying the adrenaline of it all. I invite you to come along for the ride in the form of this book. You’re going to like it. I invite people of all political perspectives to enjoy this book without getting sidetracked by politics. I won’t be discussing policies except in the context of persuasion. This book isn’t designed to change your mind about politics or about Trump. All I hope to do is teach you some things about persuasion by wrapping it in an entertaining first-person story. With your permission, let’s do that.

## CONTENTS
 
TITLE PAGE 

COPYRIGHT 

DEDICATION 

PREAMBLE: THE DAY MY REALITY SPLIT INTO TWO 

INTRODUCTION (WHERE I PRIME YOU FOR THE REST) 

PART 1 WHY FACTS ARE OVERRATED 

THE MOST IMPORTANT PERCEPTUAL SHIFT IN HISTORY 

ABOUT FACTS 

PERSUASION VOCABULARY 

PART 2 HOW TO SEE REALITY IN A MORE USEFUL WAY 

THE MYTH OF THE RATIONAL MIND 

HOW STRONG IS PERSUASION? 

THE PERSUASION FILTER 

COGNITIVE DISSONANCE 

CONFIRMATION BIAS 

MASS DELUSIONS 

WHEN REALITY BIFURCATED 

THE MAKING OF A HYPNOTIST 

PART 3 HOW PRESIDENT TRUMP DOES WHAT OTHERS CAN’T 

THE TIME OF KINGS 

PRESIDENT TRUMP’S TALENT STACK 

TRUMP’S ROSIE O’DONNELL MOMENT 

THE PERSUASION STACK 

SETTING THE TABLE

GO BIGLY OR GO HOME 

IS PRESIDENT TRUMP A “NATURAL” PERSUADER? 

PART 4 HOW TO USE PERSUASION IN BUSINESS AND POLITICS 

HOW TO DESIGN A LINGUISTIC KILL SHOT 

HOW TO USE VISUAL PERSUASION 

HOW TO MAKE PEOPLE IMAGINE YOU AS PRESIDENT 

HOW I GOT THE VP PREDICTION WRONG 

HOW TO PERSUADE BY ASSOCIATION 

HOW TO CREATE EFFECTIVE CAMPAIGN SLOGANS AND LOGOS GODZILLA GETS IN THE GAME (OR DOES HE?)

HOW TO GET AWAY WITH BAD BEHAVIOR 

HOW A TRAINED PERSUADER EVALUATES SCANDALS 

HOW TO WIN BY A HAIR( CUT) 

HOW TO CREATE TWO WAYS TO WIN, NO WAY TO LOSE 

HOW TO USE THE HIGH-GROUND MANEUVER 

A GRAB BAG OF TRUMP’S QUICKEST AND EASIEST PERSUASION TOOLS 

PART 5 WHY JOINING A TRIBE MAKES YOU POWERFUL AND BLIND 

HOW I USED THE PERSUASION FILTER TO PREDICT 

WHY I ENDORSED CLINTON (FOR MY SAFETY) UNTIL I DIDN’T 

THE THIRD ACT 

WAS I PREDICTING OR CAUSING? 

ELECTION NIGHT 

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

APPENDICES 

APPENDIX A: THE PERSUASION READING LIST 

APPENDIX B: HOW TO BE A BETTER WRITER 

APPENDIX C: HOW TO FIND OUT IF YOU ARE A SIMULATION 

APPENDIX D: TRUMP’S MANY MISTAKES 

NOTES 

INDEX 

ALSO BY SCOTT ADAMS
