Sound. The wave equation

47-1 WavesIn this chapter we shall discuss the phenomenon of waves. This is a phe-nomenon which appears in many contexts throughout physics, and therefore ourattention should be concentrated on it not only because of the particular exampleconsidered here, which is sound, but also because of the much wider applicationof the ideas in all branches of physics.

It was pointed out when we studied the harmonic oscillator that there arenot only mechanical examples of oscillating systems but electrical ones as well.Waves are related to oscillating systems, except that wave oscillations appear notonly as time-oscillations at one place, but propagate in space as well.

We have really already studied waves. When we studied light, in learningabout the properties of waves in that subject, we paid particular attention to theinterference in space of waves from several sources at diﬀerent locations and allat the same frequency. There are two important wave phenomena that we havenot yet discussed which occur in light, i.e., electromagnetic waves, as well as inany other form of waves. The ﬁrst of these is the phenomenon of interferencein time rather than interference in space. If we have two sources of sound whichhave slightly diﬀerent frequencies and if we listen to both at the same time,then sometimes the waves come with the crests together and sometimes withthe crest and trough together (see Fig. 47-1). The rising and falling of the soundthat results is the phenomenon of beats or, in other words, of interference intime. The second phenomenon involves the wave patterns which result whenthe waves are conﬁned within a given volume and reﬂect back and forth fromwalls.

These eﬀects could have been discussed, of course, for the case of electromag-netic waves. The reason for not having done this is that by using one example wewould not generate the feeling that we are actually learning about many diﬀerent

47-1

Fig. 47-1.

Interference in time of two sound sources with slightly

diﬀerent frequencies, resulting in beats.

subjects at the same time. In order to emphasize the general applicability ofwaves beyond electrodynamics, we consider here a diﬀerent example, in particularsound waves.

Other examples of waves are water waves consisting of long swells that we seecoming in to the shore, or the smaller water waves consisting of surface tensionripples. As another example, there are two kinds of elastic waves in solids; acompressional (or longitudinal) wave in which the particles of the solid oscillateback and forth along the direction of propagation of the wave (sound waves in agas are of this kind), and a transverse wave in which the particles of the solidoscillate in a direction perpendicular to the direction of propagation. Earthquakewaves contain elastic waves of both kinds, generated by a motion at some placein the earth’s crust.

Still another example of waves is found in modern physics. These are waveswhich give the probability amplitude of ﬁnding a particle at a given place—the「matter waves」which we have already discussed. Their frequency is proportional

47-2

to the energy and their wave number is proportional to the momentum. Theyare the waves of quantum mechanics.

In this chapter we shall consider only waves for which the velocity is inde-pendent of the wavelength. This is, for example, the case for light in a vacuum.The speed of light is then the same for radiowaves, blue light, green light, orfor any other wavelength. Because of this behavior, when we began to describethe wave phenomenon we did not notice at ﬁrst that we had wave propagation.Instead, we said that if a charge is moved at one place, the electric ﬁeld at adistance x was proportional to the acceleration, not at the time t, but at theearlier time t − x/c. Therefore if we were to picture the electric ﬁeld in spaceat some instant of time, as in Fig. 47-2, the electric ﬁeld at a time t later wouldhave moved the distance ct, as indicated in the ﬁgure. Mathematically, we cansay that in the one-dimensional example we are taking, the electric ﬁeld is afunction of x − ct. We see that at t = 0, it is some function of x. If we considera later time, we need only to increase x somewhat to get the same value of theelectric ﬁeld. For example, if the maximum ﬁeld occurred at x = 3 at time zero,then to ﬁnd the new position of the maximum ﬁeld at time t we need

x − ct = 3

or

x = 3 + ct.

We see that this kind of function represents the propagation of a wave.

Such a function, f(x − ct), then represents a wave. We may summarize this

description of a wave by saying simply that

f(x − ct) = f(x + ∆x − c(t + ∆t)),

Fig. 47-2. The solid curve shows what the electric ﬁeld might be likeat some instant of time and the dashed curve shows what the electricﬁeld is at a time t later.

47-3

when ∆x = c ∆t. There is, of course, another possibility, i.e., that instead ofa source to the left as indicated in Fig. 47-2, we have a source on the right, sothat the wave propagates toward negative x. Then the wave would be describedby g(x + ct).There is the additional possibility that more than one wave exists in spaceat the same time, and so the electric ﬁeld is the sum of the two ﬁelds, each onepropagating independently. This behavior of electric ﬁelds may be describedby saying that if f1(x − ct) is a wave, and if f2(x − ct) is another wave, thentheir sum is also a wave. This is called the principle of superposition. The sameprinciple is valid in sound.

We are familiar with the fact that if a sound is produced, we hear withcomplete ﬁdelity the same sequence of sounds as was generated. If we had highfrequencies travelling faster than low frequencies, a short, sharp noise would beheard as a succession of musical sounds. Similarly, if red light travelled fasterthan blue light, a ﬂash of white light would be seen ﬁrst as red, then as white,and ﬁnally as blue. We are familiar with the fact that this is not the case. Bothsound and light travel with a speed in air which is very nearly independent offrequency. Examples of wave propagation-for which this independence is not truewill be considered in Chapter 48.

In the case of light (electromagnetic waves) we gave a rule which determinedthe electric ﬁeld at a point as a result of the acceleration of a charge. One mightexpect now that what we should do is give a rule whereby some quality of theair, say the pressure, is determined at a given distance from a source in termsof the source motion, delayed by the travel time of the sound. In the case oflight this procedure was acceptable because all that we knew was that a chargeat one place exerts a force on another charge at another place. The details ofpropagation from the one place to the other were not absolutely essential. Inthe case of sound, however, we know that it propagates through the air betweenthe source and the hearer, and it is certainly a natural question to ask what,at any given moment, the pressure of the air is. We would like, in addition, toknow exactly how the air moves. In the case of electricity we could accept arule, since we could say that we do not yet know the laws of electricity, but wecannot make the same remark with regard to sound. We would not be satisﬁedwith a rule stating how the sound pressure moves through the air, because theprocess ought to be understandable as a consequence of the laws of mechanics.In short, sound is a branch of mechanics, and so it is to be understood in termsof Newton’s laws. The propagation of sound from one place to another is merely

47-4

a consequence of mechanics and the properties of gases, if it propagates in a gas,or of the properties of liquids or solids, if it propagates through such mediums.Later we shall derive the properties of light and its wave propagation in a similarway from the laws of electrodynamics.

47-2 The propagation of soundWe shall give a derivation of the properties of the propagation of soundbetween the source and the receiver as a consequence of Newton’s laws, and weshall not consider the interaction with the source and the receiver. Ordinarilywe emphasize a result rather than a particular derivation of it. In this chapterwe take the opposite view. The point here, in a certain sense, is the derivationitself. This problem of explaining new phenomena in terms of old ones, whenwe know the laws of the old ones, is perhaps the greatest art of mathematicalphysics. The mathematical physicist has two problems: one is to ﬁnd solutions,given the equations, and the other is to ﬁnd the equations which describe a newphenomenon. The derivation here is an example of the second kind of problem.We shall take the simplest example here—the propagation of sound in onedimension. To carry out such a derivation it is necessary ﬁrst to have somekind of understanding of what is going on. Fundamentally what is involved isthat if an object is moved at one place in the air, we observe that there is adisturbance which travels through the air. If we ask what kind of disturbance,we would say that we would expect that the motion of the object produces achange of pressure. Of course, if the object is moved gently, the air merely ﬂowsaround it, but what we are concerned with is a rapid motion, so that there is notsuﬃcient time for such a ﬂow. Then, with the motion, the air is compressed and achange of pressure is produced which pushes on additional air. This air is in turncompressed, which leads again to an extra pressure, and a wave is propagated.We now want to formulate such a process. We have to decide what variableswe need. In our particular problem we would need to know how much the air hasmoved, so that the air displacement in the sound wave is certainly one relevantvariable. In addition we would like to describe how the air density changes as itis displaced. The air pressure also changes, so this is another variable of interest.Then, of course, the air has a velocity, so that we shall have to describe thevelocity of the air particles. The air particles also have accelerations—but as welist these many variables we soon realize that the velocity and acceleration wouldbe known if we knew how the air displacement varies with time.

47-5

As we said, we shall consider the wave in one dimension. We can do thisif we are suﬃciently far from the source that what we call the wavefronts arevery nearly planes. We thus make our argument simpler by taking the leastcomplicated example. We shall then be able to say that the displacement, χ,depends only on x and t, and not on y and z. Therefore the description of theair is given by χ(x, t).Is this description complete? It would appear to be far from complete, for weknow none of the details of how the air molecules are moving. They are movingin all directions, and this state of aﬀairs is certainly not described by means ofthis function χ(x, t). From the point of view of kinetic theory, if we have a higherdensity of molecules at one place and a lower density adjacent to that place,the molecules would move away from the region of higher density to the one oflower density, so as to equalize this diﬀerence. Apparently we would not get anoscillation and there would be no sound. What is necessary to get the soundwave is this situation: as the molecules rush out of the region of higher densityand higher pressure, they give momentum to the molecules in the adjacent regionof lower density. For sound to be generated, the regions over which the densityand pressure change must be much larger than the distance the molecules travelbefore colliding with other molecules. This distance is the mean free path andthe distance between pressure crests and troughs must be much larger than this.Otherwise the molecules would move freely from the crest to the trough andimmediately smear out the wave.

It is clear that we are going to describe the gas behavior on a scale largecompared with the mean free path, and so the properties of the gas will not bedescribed in terms of the individual molecules. The displacement, for example,will be the displacement of the center of mass of a small element of the gas, andthe pressure or density will be the pressure or density in this region. We shallcall the pressure P and the density ρ, and they will be functions of x and t. Wemust keep in mind that this description is an approximation which is valid onlywhen these gas properties do not vary too rapidly with distance.

47-3 The wave equationThe physics of the phenomenon of sound waves thus involves three features:I. The gas moves and changes the density.II. The change in density corresponds to a change in pressure.

47-6

III. Pressure inequalities generate gas motion.Let us consider II ﬁrst. For a gas, a liquid, or a solid, the pressure is somefunction of the density. Before the sound wave arrives, we have equilibrium,with a pressure P0 and a corresponding density ρ0. A pressure P in the mediumis connected to the density by some characteristic relation P = f(ρ) and, inparticular, the equilibrium pressure P0 is given by P0 = f(ρ0). The changes ofpressure in sound from the equilibrium value are extremely small. A convenientunit for measuring pressure is the bar, where 1 bar = 105 N/m2. The pressure of1 standard atmosphere is very nearly 1 bar: 1 atm = 1.0133 bars. In sound weuse a logarithmic scale of intensities since the sensitivity of the ear is roughlylogarithmic. This scale is the decibel scale, in which the acoustic pressure levelfor the pressure amplitude P is deﬁned as

I (acoustic pressure level) = 20 log10(P/Pref) in dB,

(47.1)where the reference pressure Pref = 2 × 10−10 bar. A pressure amplitude ofP = 103Pref = 2 × 10−7 bar* corresponds to a moderately intense sound of60 decibels. We see that the pressure changes in sound are extremely smallcompared with the equilibrium, or mean, pressure of 1 atm. The displacementsand the density changes are correspondingly extremely small. In explosions wedo not have such small changes; the excess pressures produced can be greaterthan 1 atm. These large pressure changes lead to new eﬀects which we shallconsider later. In sound we do not often consider acoustic intensity levels over100 dB; 120 dB is a level which is painful to the ear. Therefore, for sound, if wewrite

(47.2)we shall always have the pressure change Pe very small compared with P0 andthe density change ρe very small compared with ρ0. Then

P = P0 + Pe,

ρ = ρ0 + ρe,

P0 + Pe = f(ρ0 + ρe) = f(ρ0) + ρef0(ρ0),

(47.3)where P0 = f(ρ0) and f0(ρ0) stands for the derivative of f(ρ) evaluated at ρ = ρ0.We can take the second step in this equality only because ρe is very small. We ﬁndin this way that the excess pressure Pe is proportional to the excess density ρe,* With this choice of Pref, the P is not the peak pressure in the sound wave but the

「root-mean-square」pressure, which is 1/(2)1/2 times the peak pressure.

47-7

and we may call the proportionality factor κ:

Pe = κρe,

where κ = f0(ρ0) = (dP/dρ)0.

(47.4)

The relation we needed for II is this very simple one.

Fig. 47-3. The displacement of the air at x is χ(x, t), and at x + ∆xit is χ(x + ∆x, t). The original volume of the air for a unit area of theplane wave is ∆x; the new volume is ∆x + χ(x + ∆x, t) − χ(x, t).

Let us now consider I. We shall suppose that the position of a portion ofair undisturbed by the sound wave is x and the displacement at the time t dueto the sound is χ(x, t), so that its new position is x + χ(x, t), as in Fig. 47-3.Now the undisturbed position of a nearby portion of air is x + ∆x, and its newposition is x + ∆x + χ(x + ∆x, t). We can now ﬁnd the density changes in thefollowing way. Since we are limiting ourselves to plane waves, we can take a unitarea perpendicular to the x-direction, which is the direction of propagation ofthe sound wave. The amount of air, per unit area, in ∆x is then ρ0 ∆x, where ρ0is the undisturbed, or equilibrium, air density. This air, when displaced by thesound wave, now lies between x + χ(x, t) and x + ∆x + χ(x + ∆x, t), so that wehave the same matter in this interval that was in ∆x when undisturbed. If ρ isthe new density, then

ρ0 ∆x = ρ[x + ∆x + χ(x + ∆x, t) − x − χ(x, t)].

(47.5)

Since ∆x is small, we can write χ(x + ∆x, t) − χ(x, t) = (∂χ/∂x) ∆x. Thisderivative is a partial derivative, since χ depends on the time as well as on x.Our equation then is

ρ0 ∆x = ρ

∆x + ∆x

(47.6)

(cid:19)

(cid:18) ∂χ

∂x

47-8

or

ρ0 = (ρ0 + ρe) ∂χ∂x

+ ρ0 + ρe.

(47.7)

Now in sound waves all changes are small so that ρe is small, χ is small, and∂χ/∂x is also small. Therefore in the relation that we have just found,

ρe = −ρ0

− ρe

∂χ∂x

∂χ∂x

,

(47.8)

∂χ∂x

.

(I)

we can neglect ρe ∂χ/∂x compared with ρ0 ∂χ/∂x. Thus we get the relation weneeded for I:

ρe = −ρ0

(47.9)This equation is what we would expect physically. If the displacements vary withx, then there will be density changes. The sign is also right: if the displacement χincreases with x, so that the air is stretched out, the density must go down.We now need the third equation, which is the equation of the motion producedby the pressure. If we know the relation between the force and the pressure, wecan then get the equation of motion. If we take a thin slab of air of length ∆xand of unit area perpendicular to x, then the mass of air in this slab is ρ0 ∆x andit has the acceleration ∂2χ/∂t2, so the mass times the acceleration for this slabof matter is ρ0 ∆x(∂2χ/∂t2). (It makes no diﬀerence for small ∆x whether theacceleration ∂2χ/∂t2 is evaluated at an edge of the slab or at some intermediateposition.) If now we ﬁnd the force on this matter for a unit area perpendicular to x,it will then be equal to ρ0 ∆x(∂2χ/∂t2). We have the force in the +x-direction,at x, of amount P(x, t) per unit area, and we have the force in the oppositedirection, at x + ∆x, of amount P(x + ∆x, t) per unit area (Fig. 47-4):

P(x, t) − P(x + ∆x, t) = − ∂P∂x

∆x = − ∂Pe∂x

∆x,

(47.10)

Fig. 47-4. The net force in the positive x-direction produced by the

pressure acting on unit area perpendicular to x is −(∂P/∂x) ∆x.

47-9

since ∆x is small and since the only part of P which changes is the excesspressure Pe. We now have III:

∂2χ∂t2

ρ0

= − ∂Pe∂x

,

(III)

(47.11)

and so we have enough equations to interconnect things and reduce down to onevariable, say to χ. We can eliminate Pe from III by using II, so that we get

∂2χ∂t2

ρ0

= −κ

∂ρe∂x

,

(47.12)

and then we can use I to eliminate ρe. In this way we ﬁnd that ρ0 cancels outand that we are left with

We shall call c2

s

∂2χ∂t2

∂2χ∂x2 .

= κ= κ, so that we can write= 1c2s

∂2χ∂x2

∂2χ∂t2 .

(47.13)

(47.14)

This is the wave equation which describes the behavior of sound in matter.

47-4 Solutions of the wave equationWe now can see whether this equation really does describe the essentialproperties of sound waves in matter. We want to deduce that a sound pulse,or disturbance, will move with a constant speed. We want to verify that twodiﬀerent pulses can move through each other—the principle of superposition. Wealso want to verify that sound can go either to the right or to the left. All theseproperties should be contained in this one equation.

We have remarked that any plane-wave disturbance which moves with aconstant velocity v has the form f(x− vt). Now we have to see whether χ(x, t) =f(x − vt) is a solution of the wave equation. When we calculate ∂χ/∂x, we getthe derivative of the function, ∂χ/∂x = f0(x − vt). Diﬀerentiating once more,we ﬁnd

∂2χ∂x2

= f00(x − vt).

47-10

(47.15)

The diﬀerentiation of this same function with respect to t gives −v timesthe derivative of the function, or ∂χ/∂t = −vf0(x − vt), and the second timederivative is

= v2f00(x − vt).

(47.16)It is evident that f(x − vt) will satisfy the wave equation provided the wavevelocity v is equal to cs.We ﬁnd, therefore, from the laws of mechanics that any sound disturbancepropagates with the velocity cs, and in addition we ﬁnd that

∂2χ∂t2

cs = κ1/2 = (dP/dρ)1/20

,

and so we have related the wave velocity to a property of the medium.If we consider a wave travelling in the opposite direction, so that χ(x, t) =g(x + vt), it is easy to see that such a disturbance also satisﬁes the wave equation.The only diﬀerence between such a wave and one travelling from left to rightis in the sign of v, but whether we have x + vt or x − vt as the variable in thefunction does not aﬀect the sign of ∂2χ/∂t2, since it involves only v2. It followsthat we have a solution for waves propagating in either direction with speed cs.An extremely interesting question is that of superposition. Suppose onesolution of the wave equation has been found, say χ1. This means that the secondderivative of χ1 with respect to x is equal to 1/c2times the second derivativeof χ1 with respect to t. Now any other solution χ2 has this same property. If wesuperpose these two solutions, we have

s

(47.17)and we wish to verify that χ(x, t) is also a wave, i.e., that χ satisﬁes the waveequation. We can easily prove this result, since we have

χ(x, t) = χ1(x, t) + χ2(x, t),

and, in addition,

∂2χ∂x2

= ∂2χ1∂x2

+ ∂2χ2∂x2

(47.18)

∂2χ∂t2It follows that ∂2χ/∂x2 = (1/c2) ∂2χ/∂t2, so we have veriﬁed the principle ofsuperposition. The proof of the principle of superposition follows from the factthat the wave equation is linear in χ.

+ ∂2χ2∂t2 .

= ∂2χ1∂t2

(47.19)

s

47-11

We can now expect that a plane light wave propagating in the x-direction,polarized so that the electric ﬁeld is in the y-direction, will satisfy the waveequation

∂2Ey∂x2

= 1c2

∂2Ey∂t2 ,

(47.20)

where c is the speed of light. This wave equation is one of the consequences ofMaxwell’s equations. The equations of electrodynamics will lead to the waveequation for light just as the equations of mechanics lead to the wave equationfor sound.

47-5 The speed of soundOur deduction of the wave equation for sound has given us a formula whichconnects the wave speed with the rate of change of pressure with the density atthe normal pressure:

.

(47.21)

(cid:18) dP

(cid:19)

dρ

0

=

c2

s

In evaluating this rate of change, it is essential to know how the temperaturevaries. In a sound wave, we would expect that in the region of compression thetemperature would be raised, and that in the region of rarefaction the temperaturewould be lowered. Newton was the ﬁrst to calculate the rate of change of pressurewith density, and he supposed that the temperature remained unchanged. Heargued that the heat was conducted from one region to the other so rapidly thatthe temperature could not rise or fall. This argument gives the isothermal speedof sound, and it is wrong. The correct deduction was given later by Laplace,who put forward the opposite idea—that the pressure and temperature changeadiabatically in a sound wave. The heat ﬂow from the compressed region to therareﬁed region is negligible so long as the wavelength is long compared with themean free path. Under this condition the slight amount of heat ﬂow in a soundwave does not aﬀect the speed, although it gives a small absorption of the soundenergy. We can expect correctly that this absorption increases as the wavelengthapproaches the mean free path, but these wavelengths are smaller by factors ofabout a million than the wavelengths of audible sound.

The actual variation of pressure with density in a sound wave is the one thatallows no heat ﬂow. This corresponds to the adiabatic variation, which we found

47-12

to be P V γ = const, where V was the volume. Since the density ρ varies inverselywith V , the adiabatic connection between P and ρ is

(47.22)from which we get dP/dρ = γP/ρ. We then have for the speed of sound therelation

P = const ργ,

c2

s

= γPρ

.

(47.23)

We can also write c2= γP V /ρV and make use of the relation P V = N kT.Further, we see that ρV is the mass of gas, which can also be expressed as N m,or as µ per mole, where m is the mass of a molecule and µ is the molecularweight. In this way we ﬁnd that

s

c2

s

= γkTm

= γRTµ

,

(47.24)

from which it is evident that the speed of sound depends only on the gas temper-ature and not on the pressure or the density. We also have observed that

(47.25)where hv2i is the mean square of the speed of the molecules. It follows thatc2

= (γ/3)hv2i, or

kT = 1

s

3 mhv2i,(cid:19)1/2

vav.

(cid:18) γ

3

cs =

(47.26)

This equation states that the speed of sound is some number which is roughly1/(3)1/2 times some average speed, vav, of the molecules (the square root of themean square velocity). In other words, the speed of sound is of the same order ofmagnitude as the speed of the molecules, and is actually somewhat less than thisaverage speed.

Of course we could expect such a result, because a disturbance like a changein pressure is, after all, propagated by the motion of the molecules. However,such an argument does not tell us the precise propagation speed; it could haveturned out that sound was carried primarily by the fastest molecules, or by theslowest molecules. It is reasonable and satisfying that the speed of sound isroughly 1

2 of the average molecular speed vav.

47-13

48

