My fair lady.

The more we think about this familiar nursery rhyme, the more eerie it appears to be. Though it cannot be traced with certainty much before the seventeenth century, it is undoubtedly very much older, and the Oxford Dictionary of Nursery Rhymes devotes several rather gruesome pages to it. All over the world bridge-building used to be associated with children's dances – on y danse, on y danse9 sur le pont d'Avignon – and with human sacrifices which are not just legends. At least one child's skeleton has been discovered immured in the foundations of a bridge.* Perhaps for this reason, special orders of bridge-building friars -Fratres Pontifices – were founded during the Middle Ages in various parts of Europe. They produced a saint, St Bénezèt, who is supposed to have designed the pont d'Avignon. Like Telford, in a later age, he had been a shepherd boy, and it is rather a nice thought that, dispensing with the sacrifices, he kept the children's dances and the tune to which French children dance to this day. The French branch of the order of bridge-building friars had a monastery, near Paris, with the charming name of Saint Jacques-de-Haut-Pas.

In practical terms, the purpose of a bridge is to enable heavy objects, such as vehicles, to cross over some kind of gap or chasm. Provided that the weight is supported in a safe manner it usually does not matter very much by what technical means this is done. As it turns out, there is a very considerable variety of structural principles which can be employed.

The method which is actually chosen in any given case depends not only upon the physical and economic conditions but also upon the fashion of the day and the whim of the engineer. Almost every conceivable way in which a bridge could possibly be made has actually been tried, at one time or another, for making real bridges. One might have supposed that one approach to the problem would have turned out to be the ‘best' one and would have come to be generally accepted, but this is not the case; and the number of structural systems which are in common use seems to increase as time goes on.

In civilized countries bridges are littered about the landscape in generous numbers and in a rich variety; they provide a very interesting display of different structural principles. With most other artefacts the vital structure is hidden away behind panelling or insulation or wiring or gadgets of one kind or another and is not easily seen or inferred. One virtue of bridges is that both the structure and the way in which it works are clear for all to see.

Arch bridges

Arch bridges have always been popular and, in various forms, they are still very much in fashion. A simple masonry arch can quite safely be built with a span of well over 200 feet (60 metres). For most sites, if there are objections they are likely to be associated with the cost or with the rise of the arch and with the load on the abutments or foundations.

If we are concerned with the plain, semi-circular masonry arch which was widely used in Roman and medieval times, then one of the facts of life is that the rise of the arch must be about half its span. Thus a 100 foot span will call for a rise of at least 50 feet – in practice rather more. This is all very well if the bridge is spanning a ravine which is more than 50 feet deep, because the arch can then be sunk so that its crown is level with the roadway on either side. However, if the bridge is to be built on flat ground, then we have the alternatives, on the one hand, of a hump-backed bridge, which is inconvenient and dangerous, or, on the other, of having to build long and expensive sloping approaches.

The problem became particularly important with the coming of railways, because trains don't like hump-backed bridges – or indeed gradients of any kind – and the expense of earth-moving to make embankments for a flat approach is a serious matter. One way of getting round the difficulty, at least to a certain extent, is to build a rather flat arch with considerably less rise. In 1837, faced with the problem of getting the Great Western Railway across the Thames at Maidenhead, Isambard Kingdom Brunei built a bridge of two brick arches, each with, a span of 128 feet and a rise of only 24 feet (Plate 10).

Both the public and the experts were horrified, and the papers were full of letters prophesying that the bridge would never stand. To keep the correspondence and the publicity going, and perhaps to gratify his sense of humour, Brunei delayed removing the wooden centering or false-work on which the arches had been erected. Naturally, it was said that he was frightened to do so. When, after about a year, the centering was destroyed in a storm, the arches stood perfectly well. Brunei then revealed that the centering had, in fact, been eased to a clearance of a few inches soon after the brickwork was in place and had been doing nothing at all for many months. The bridge is still there today, carrying trains about ten times as heavy as Brunei ever intended.

When we flatten the shape of an arch, so as to reduce the rise in proportion to the span, the compressive thrust between the voussoirs of the arch-ring is considerably increased, as we should expect. However, the compressive stresses are still, as a rule, well below the crushing strength of the masonry, and the voussoirs of the arch are seldom in any danger of being broken, although the deflections which occur when the arch settles after the centering is removed may be quite large and often amount to several inches.

Any real damage to a ‘flat' arch, however, is most likely to be a consequence of the greater thrust which must come upon the abutments. If the foundations are of a solid material, such as rock, all will be well, but if they are upon soft ground there may be serious trouble if they yield too much. Unfortunately, the need for a long, flat arch is most likely to occur when we are bridging rivers which flow across a level and boggy couiitry.

It is for these reasons that bridges are often built with many small arches; in fact nearly all long medieval bridges are multi-arch bridges. The objection to this way of doing things is that the cost of building the supporting piers – usually under water and often on soft ground – is high, and, furthermore, the numerous piers and narrow arches obstruct the channel and may cause floods and danger to navigation.

Cast-iron bridges

Some of the objections to arched bridges can be got over by making them from less traditional materials. By the 1770s people like John Wilkinson (1728-1808) – who had greatly cheapened the manufacture of cast iron by improvements to blast-furnaces – began to cast voussoirs from iron. Cast iron is a totally different kind of material from wrought iron and steel because, unlike these substances, it is very brittle. It resembles stone in being strong in compression but weak and unreliable in tension, and so, in building construction, it has to be treated rather like masonry.

An advantage of cast iron is that it is possible to cast architectural members, such as voussoirs, in the form of an open, trellis-like framework, so that there can be an enormous reduction in weight, as compared with traditional masonry. Furthermore, it is generally cheaper to cast iron than to carve stone, and, before taste degenerated around the time of the first Reform Bill, these iron castings were often of very attractive shape.

The benefit of cast iron to bridge-building was two fold. In the first place, there was a saving in labour and transport costs; but more significantly the reduction in the weight of arches diminished the magnitude of the thrust upon the abutments and thus enabled engineers to build flatter arches with cheaper foundations.

Curiously, one of the first people to take advantage of this technique was the American Thomas Paine (1737-1809), who is famous in the history books as the author of The Rights of Man. Paine planned to build a great cast-iron bridge, which he had designed himself, across the Schuylkill river, near Philadelphia. He came to England to order the castings, and while they were being made he decided, as a supporter of the French Revolution, to pay a visit to his Jacobin friends in Paris. These gentlemen put him in prison and very nearly guillotined him. He was just saved by the fall of Robespierre.

As a result of the delay, Paine's finances collapsed and the castings were sold off to build a bridge over the Wear at Sunder-land. The arch, which was finished in 1796, had a clear span of 236 feet with a rise of only 34 feet. The reason why Brunei did not use cast iron for the Maidenhead bridge forty years later was probably that he was afraid that the vibrations of the trains would crack the brittle cast iron. In any case, his brick arches worked very well.

During the nineteenth century a great many cast-iron arch bridges were built. Although nearly all of them were successful, the method is scarcely ever used today, chiefly because there are now cheaper ways of doing the same job. Unfortunately, a very flat cast-iron arch looks, superficially, rather like a beam (see Chapter 11). Structurally the two are quite different, since the arch is, or should be, entirely in compression, whereas the underside of a beam is in tension. T/'the material can be relied upon to carry tensile stresses, then a beam is often lighter and cheaper than an arch, for a comparable service.

Some of the early engineers, notably Robert Stephenson (1803-59), were tempted by this prospect of economy to venture into using cast-iron beams. Because of Robert Stephenson's outstanding professional reputation the railway companies were persuaded to build several hundred cast-iron beam bridges. However, as we have said, cast-iron is weak and treacherous in tension, and these bridges turned out to be very dangerous indeed. In the end, every one of them had to be replaced and the expense to the companies was naturally severe.

The arch bridge with suspended roadway

A modern tendency in building large arch bridges is to use a suspended roadway. If we split the arch-ring into two parallel elements, which are made from steel or reinforced concrete, then we can hang the roadway from the arches, at any level we like, in much the same way as is done in suspension bridges (Figure 1). There is then, of course, no restriction on the rise of the arch.

Figure 1. Arch with suspended roadway.

The Hell Gate bridge in New York (1915), which is 1,000 feet (300 metres) span, and the Sydney Harbour bridge (1930), which has a span of 1,650 feet or 500 metres, are steel bridges of this type. In such bridges the main loads are carried entirely in compression in the arches, and the hanging roadway is free from longitudinal stresses. In big bridges the thrust upon the abutments is therefore considerable, and very reliable foundations are needed. Both the Hell Gate and the Sydney Harbour bridges are founded on solid rock.

Suspension bridges

Masonry arches have a number of advantages. As we have seen in the last chapter, they are comparatively easy to design, since one can generally scale up from previous experience quite safely. In fact, as Professor Heyman remarks, it is very difficult to design an arch which will actually fall down. This feat was, in fact, achieved by a certain William Edwards at Pontypridd in 1751, but I do not think there is any record of its happening since. Again, arches are not unduly sensitive to a reasonable amount of movement in the foundations. However, foundations of some sort there must be; and on soft ground they have a way of being both troublesome and expensive.

Furthermore, although the maintenance cost of masonry is usually low, the first cost has always been high, and this is particularly the case with large bridges, which need elaborate centering during erection. For these reasons there has always been a demand for something cheap and cheerful in the bridge line. In primitive countries suspension bridges of various sorts were fairly common; these were made from rope or other kinds of vegetable fibre. Rope suspension bridges were also used by military engineers for temporary bridging, notably by Wellington's sappers during the Peninsular War.

However, although rope is a strong and reliable material for carrying tension when it is new, ropes made from plant fibres deteriorate fairly quickly in the open and become undependable -as the more interesting personalities in the neighbourhood of the bridge of San Luis Rey discovered.* For a permanent suspension bridge, cables of iron or steel are necessary. Cast iron was far too brittle and steel was not commercially available until relatively recently, but wrought iron is fairly strong and very tough; also it is exceptionally resistant to corrosion.

Although a footbridge 70 feet (20 metres) long, made with iron chains, was erected over the Tees in 1741, wrought iron was generally too expensive to be used at all widely in bridge-building until the puddling process† was introduced about 1790. After this, wrought-iron chains became comparatively cheap. In the Tees bridge the flooring was attached directly to the chains in the primitive manner, so that the bridge was impassable to vehicles and must have been both steep and alarming for pedestrians. The modern system of supporting the cables from high towers and hanging the roadway below the cables (Figure 2) was invented by James Finlay, of Pennsylvania, who began to build bridges of this kind around 1796.

Figure 2. The modern form of suspension bridge, with a level roadway hung from the cables, was invented by James Finlay about 1796.

The combination of a suspended, level roadway with the availability of wrought-iron chains at a reasonable price made the suspension bridge an attractive proposition for carrying wheeled traffic over wide rivers. For many situations these bridges were much cheaper and more practical than large masonry bridges. The idea was taken up very actively in many countries, and especially by Thomas Telford, whose bridge across the Menai Straits (Plate 11) was finished in 1825; it has a centre span of 550 feet (166 metres), by far the longest then in existence.

Telford's chains, like all the suspension chains used in bridges at that time, were made from flat plates or links, joined by bolts or pins, very much like the links of a modern bicycle chain. The concentration of stress at the pin joints calls for a tough and ductile material, such as wrought iron, and indeed chains of this type have been very successful and have seldom given any trouble. Although wrought iron is reliable in tension it is not especially strong, and Telford wisely kept the highest nominal stress in his chains down to about 8,000 p.s.i. (55 MN/m2), which is less than a third of the breaking stress.

In these circumstances a great deal of the strength of the chains was devoted to supporting their own weight, and Telford was of the opinion that the Menai bridge represented about the maximum safe span for a suspension bridge, using the materials of the day. Although Brunei eventually showed that Telford was being rather cautious – Brunei's Clifton bridge has a span of 630 feet or 190 metres – yet for many years the span of the Menai bridge remained a record; and, in any case, the limitations of wrought-iron chains were clearly within sight.

The recent fashion for road suspension bridges of great length is made possible by the availability of high tensile steel wire. This material is very much stronger than wrought iron or mild steel and can therefore support a much greater length of its own weight. High tensile steel is more brittle than wrought iron, but this can be accepted, since the cable is continuous and does not have to have links with pinned joints, which are particularly vulnerable to cracking. Again, instead of having only three or four plate links in parallel with each other in each element of a chain cable, the wire cables are woven from many hundred separate wires, so that the failure of any individual wire is not likely to be dangerous (Plate 12).

As an example of the sort of thing one can do nowadays, the new Humber motorway bridge has a clear span of 4,626 feet (1,388 metres), which is over eight times the length that Telford thought practicable. This is made possible by the fact that the suspension wires operate, quite safely, at a working stress of 85,000 p.s.i. or 580 MN/m2, which is more than ten times the stress in Telford's wrought-irdn chains.

Thrust lines in arches and suspension bridges

The cables of a suspension bridge take up the best shape automatically, because a flexible rope has no choice but to comply with the resultant of all the loads which are pulling on it. We can therefore determine the shape of the cables for a suspension bridge either by loading a model of it, as Telford did, or else by means of a fairly simple exercise with a thing called the ‘funicular polygon' on the drawing board. This is useful in designing suspension bridges – for instance we need to know the right lengths for the hangers for the roadway – but it is also useful in designing arches.

If we look at a suspension bridge and then at an arch, it does not need much imagination to see that the suspension bridge is really an arch turned upside down – or vice versa. In other words, if we change the sign of all the stresses in an arch, that is, if we turn all the compressions into tensions, then these tensions could be carried by a single curved rope, which may be regarded as defining a ‘thrust line' in tension. By doing this we can arrive, comparatively painlessly, at the compressive thrust line for an arched bridge or a vaulted roof.

When we do so we may get various shapes of thrust line which will vary a bit according to the details of the loading, for instance the presence or absence of traffic on the bridge. Any of these thrust lines will be safe, provided that it lies wholly within the intended shape of the arch-ring; if not, not. It is sometimes said, by slightly superior people, that the thrust line of an arch obtained in this way has the shape of a catenary, and that a round arch is therefore ‘wrong'. This is by no means always the case, and in many instances the thrust line is quite near enough to an arc of a circle to justify the Romans in their highly durable semi-circular arches. However, if one wants to make a really thin arch – as is the custom with modern reinforced concrete bridges – then one had better get the shape just right, for there is very little room for the thrust line to wander about.

The development of the bowstring girder

Although the suspension bridge got off to a flying start at the beginning of the nineteenth century, its development was interrupted for about a hundred years by the coming of the railways. Most of the 25,000 major bridges which were built in England during the Victorian era were railway bridges. The suspension bridge is a highly flexible structure, and it is liable to deform dangerously under large concentrated loads. This characteristic does not matter very much for road bridges,* but trains are generally about a hundred times as heavy as carts or lorries, and so the deflections they cause are likely to be a hundred times as great and therefore unacceptable. The few railway suspension bridges which were built in England were conspicuous failures. The Americans, who had wider rivers, and at that time less money and more faith, persisted with them for a while but had to give most of them up in the end.

There was therefore a need for bridges which were not only light and cheap but also rigid and suitable for large spans. This led to the development of what is called the ‘tied arch' or ‘bowstring girder' (Figure 3). An arch, of course, is pretty rigid, but it thrusts outward on its abutments with a very considerable force. This may not matter if these abutments consist of nice firm rock, but it is awkward in many of the situations which may arise in railway construction. It is particularly inconvenient if it is required to perch an arch, or a series of arches, on top of tall and slender piers which may be in no position to resist large lateral loads.

Figure 3. The bowstring girder, or tied arch, relieves the abutments of lateral thrust. It was popular with Victorian railway engineers.

However, this is just what the Victorian engineers so often wanted to do, for they frequently carried their railways boldly across deep valleys, sometimes at a height of 100 feet or more. One way of solving the problem is to tie the two ends of the arch together by means of a tension member. This can be done by using a suspended roadway, which in this case is made to work for its living: the roadway itself is put into tension.

The bowstring girder looks superficially like an ordinary arch with a suspended roadway, but its manner of working is quite different. Now there is no sideways push or pull upon the foundations, which have only to support the vertical downward load arising from the actual weight of the girder and any vehicles which may be on it. In fact the whole affair can be mounted on rollers instead of on rigid foundations, and this is often done, mainly to allow for thermal expansions and contractions in the metal. Since such girders produce no lengthwise thrust, they can be mounted on top of relatively narrow masonry columns.

The fact that a bowstring girder can be treated as an integral, self-contained unit may greatly facilitate the construction of a large bridge, because it is possible to assemble the girders at ground level, on some site away from the bridge itself. They can then be floated out to the piers on rafts and raised into position by means of jacks. This is just what Brunei did with the spans of the Saltash bridge. As we shall see in the next chapter, the tied arch is really yet another member of the prolific family of ‘trusses' or lattice girders with which structural engineering is so thickly populated.

* * *

* At the Roman fort at Lowbury Hill, in Berkshire, a mile or so from where I am writing this chapter, the body of a woman was discovered concreted into the foundations. The practice has lasted into modern times. In 1865 it was alleged that in Ragusa Christian children were being kidnapped by Mohammedans in order to immure them in the foundations of fortifications. Even in England, as late as 1871, a certain Lord Leigh was seriously suspected of having built an ‘obnoxious person' into the foundations of a bridge at Stoneleigh in Warwickshire.

* The Bridge of San Luis Rey, Thornton Wilder (1927).

† The New Science of Strong Materials, Chapter 10.

*All Telford's bridges were road or canal bridges. The Americans made fairly extensive use of suspension bridges for canal aqueducts; the water channel was carried in a suspended wooden flume. Naturally there was no change of net load – and therefore no change of deflection – when a barge passed over the bridge.

Chapter 11 The advantage of being a beam

-with observations on roofs, trusses and masts

Solomon... built the House of the Forest of Lebanon, a hundred cubits long, fifty broad, and thirty high, constructed of four rows of cedar columns, over which were laid lengths of cedar. It had a cedar roof, extending over the beams, which rested on the columns, fifteen in each row; and the number of the beams was forty-five.

第 10 章

倒下的和未倒下的桥梁 —— 拱桥、铸铁桥和悬索桥

伦敦桥要倒了，

要倒了，要倒了；

伦敦桥要倒了；

我美丽的女士。

建起来用砖石，

用砖石，用砖石；

建起来用砖石；

我美丽的女士。

找人来盯一整夜，

一整夜，一整夜；

找人来盯一整夜；

我美丽的女士。

我们越琢磨这首熟悉的童谣，越觉得诡异。虽然尚无法确定它可追溯到 17 世纪以前，但它无疑非常古老，《牛津童谣词典》（Oxford Dictionary of Nursery Rhymes）竟然用好几页的篇幅解释它。在全世界范围内，桥梁建造常和儿童舞蹈联系在一起（「我们舞蹈，我们舞蹈，在阿维尼翁桥」），也与不仅仅是传说的活人献祭有关。至少有一副儿童骨架在桥基里被发现。[1] 或许正是基于这个原因，在中世纪的欧洲各地纷纷建立了专门的造桥修士团。他们造就了一位圣徒圣贝内泽（StBénezèt），应该是他设计了阿维尼翁桥。像后来的特尔福德一样，他也曾是个牧童，人们善意地认为，是他免除了献祭，并使儿童舞蹈和法式童舞曲调留存至今。造桥修士团法国分部的修道院位于巴黎附近，即著名的圣雅克修道院。

实际上，桥梁的用途是让车辆等重物能横越某种间隔或缝隙。假如重量是以安全的方法来支撑，那么采取什么样的技术手段来达成目的通常就不那么重要了。结果表明，有各种各样的结构原理可以应用。

在任意给定情况下，实际选择的方法不仅依赖于物质和经济条件，还取决于当时的流行风尚和工程师的心血来潮。几乎每一种可能的造桥方式实际上都在现实的桥梁上尝试过了。有人可能会认为，解决问题之法到头来总会是「最好」的一个且被普遍接受，但实际情况并非如此；常用结构体系的数量似乎随时间流逝而不断增加。

在文明开化的国家，桥梁随处可见且种类丰富；它们对不同的结构原理进行了非常有趣的展示。大多数其他人造物的关键结构都深藏于镶板、隔层、布线或诸多小配件之后，不易看出或推断出；而桥梁的一个长处是，其结构和运作方式都一目了然。

拱桥

拱桥一直颇受欢迎，不论何种样式，都非常流行。一个简单的砖石砌拱的跨度可安全地达到 200 英尺（60 米）以上。对大多数场所而言，如果没有采用拱桥，那么很可能与成本、拱高，以及桥墩或桥基处的载荷有关。

如果我们关心的是古罗马和中世纪普遍使用的平地半圆砖石砌拱，那么生活中的一个事实是，拱高必须为砖石砌拱跨度的大约一半。因此，100 英尺的跨度需要至少 50 英尺的拱高，在实践中还要更高。如果桥梁跨越的沟壑超过 50 英尺深，是没有问题的，因为拱可以沉下去，让拱顶同两边的路面一样高。但是，如果要把桥建在平地上，我们就得另做打算：要么选择不便利且危险的驼峰桥，要么选择又长又贵的倾斜桥。

随着铁路时代的到来，这个难题变得尤其重要，因为火车不喜欢驼峰桥或者任何坡度，为建造平坦路堤而掘土的花销不可小觑。建造一个拱高低得多的平拱至少可在一定程度上克服这个困难。1837 年，为了让大西部铁路线在梅登黑德横跨泰晤士河，伊桑巴德·金德姆·布鲁内尔建了一座双砖拱桥，每个拱的跨度为 128 英尺，而拱高仅为 24 英尺（见插图 10）。

公众和专家都对此感到震惊，报纸纷纷预言这座桥永远也立不起来。为了保持媒体热度和宣传力度，或许也是为了衬托他的幽默感，布鲁内尔推迟了移除支撑拱的木制拱架或脚手架的时间。有传言说他是因为害怕。大约一年后，当拱架在暴风雨中被摧毁时，拱桥仍然屹立不倒。布鲁内尔随后透露，事实上拱架在砌砖就位后不久便被缓缓挪出了几英寸的间隙，数月来没起到任何作用。这座桥至今仍矗立在那儿，其承载的列车重量大约是布鲁内尔预计的 10 倍。

当我们将拱的形状变平以降低与跨度成比例的拱高时，拱环楔块间的挤压推力会大幅增加，正如我们预期的那样。但是，压应力照例仍远低于砖石建筑的抗碎强度，拱的楔块破裂的风险极小，即便拱架移除后，拱下沉过程中产生的挠变可能相当大，通常可达数英寸。

然而，造成「平」拱的任何实际损坏的最大的原因是，在拱墩上施加更大的推力。如果拱基是由像岩石这样的结实材料构成的，就会相安无事；但若它建在软地层上，移位太多则可能会带来巨大的麻烦。不幸的是，对又长又平的拱的需求最有可能出现在我们架桥跨越流经平坦沼泽地区的河流时。

正是出于这些理由，桥梁常常是用许多小拱组成的；事实上，几乎所有中世纪的长桥都是多拱桥。反对如此行事的理由是，建造支承墩（通常在水下，有时也在软地层上）的成本较高，而且大量的支承墩和窄拱会阻塞河道，可能导致洪水泛滥并威胁航运。

铸铁桥

关于拱桥的一些反对意见，可通过使用非传统材料建造来化解。18 世纪 70 年代，约翰·威尔金森（John Wilkinson）等人 —— 通过改进高炉大大降低了铸铁的冶炼成本 —— 开始用铁铸造楔块。铸铁是一种完全不同于锻铁和钢的材料，它非常脆。它在压缩状态下像石块一样坚硬，但在拉伸状态下却变得不可靠，所以在建筑构造中，我们只能把它当成砖石。

铸铁的优势在于，它有可能将楔块等建筑构件铸造成中空格状框架的样式，使其相较于传统砖石重量大幅减少。此外，铸铁一般比刻石便宜，在《1832 年改革法案》出台前后的品位退化趋势出现之前，这些铁铸件通常具有非常吸引人的形状。

铸铁对造桥的益处是双倍的。第一个益处是，它节约了劳动和运输成本；第二个也是更有意义的益处是，拱重量的减少降低了作用于拱墩的推力，允许工程师用更便宜的拱基建造更平的拱。

奇妙的是，第一批利用这种技术优势的人里就有托马斯·潘恩（Thomas Paine），他因著有《人的权利》（The Rights of Man）而名垂青史。潘恩计划亲自设计并建造一座大型铸铁桥，横跨费城附近的斯库尔基尔河。他来到英格兰订购铸件，在铸件制造期间，他作为法国大革命的拥护者前往巴黎拜访他的雅各宾派友人。但这些绅士却把他投进监狱，还差点儿将他送上断头台。直到罗伯斯庇尔政权垮台，他才被解救出来。

由于延滞，潘恩的财务崩溃了，铸件也被折价售卖用于建造森德兰的威尔河谷上的一座桥。这座拱桥建于 1796 年，净跨度为 236 英尺，拱高仅为 34 英尺。40 年后，布鲁内尔没有用铸铁建造梅登黑德桥，或许是因为他担心列车的振动会使脆性的铸铁开裂。不管怎样，他的砖拱运行状况良好。

19 世纪期间建造了大量铸铁拱桥，虽然它们几乎都成功了，但这种方法今天却少有使用，主要是因为现在有更便宜的办法可达到同样的目的。不幸的是，非常平的铸铁拱乍看起来有点儿像梁（见第 11 章）。在结构上，两者完全不同，因为拱是（或应该是）全部处于压缩状态之下，而梁的下表面则处于拉伸状态之下。如果材料能被用来承载拉应力，那么就类似的用途而言，梁通常比拱更轻也更便宜。

某些早期的工程师，尤其是罗伯特·史蒂芬孙（Robert Stephenson），在这种经济前景的引诱下冒险使用了铸铁梁。由于史蒂芬孙杰出的职业声望，铁路公司被说服建造了几百座铸铁梁桥。然而，正如我们说过的那样，铸铁在拉伸状态下脆弱而不可靠，这些桥被证实确实非常危险。最终，它们不得不被逐一替换掉，铁路公司自然损失惨重。

悬吊路面的拱桥

建造大型拱桥的一个现代趋势是运用悬吊路面。我们把拱环拆分成两个平行的部分，用钢材或钢筋混凝土建造，这样我们就能将路面悬挂到拱上，位于我们喜欢的任意水平高度，类似于悬索桥（见图 10–1）。当然，这样做的话，拱高也不受限制。

图 10–1 悬吊路面的拱

纽约地狱门大桥（建于 1915 年）的跨度为 1 000 英尺（约 300 米），悉尼海港大桥（建于 1930 年）的跨度为 1 650 英尺（约 500 米），它们都属于这种类型的钢制桥。在这类桥梁中，主要载荷全都由受压的拱承担，而悬挂的路面则免受纵向应力。因此，在大型桥梁中，作用于桥墩的推力是相当大的，所以需要非常可靠的桥基。纽约地狱门大桥和悉尼海港大桥都建在坚固的岩石上。

悬索桥

砖石砌拱有许多优点。如我们在上一章所见，它们比较容易设计，因为一般情况下，我们可以安全地根据先前的经验把它们按比例放大。事实上，如海曼教授所说，要设计出一个会坍塌的拱非常困难。这一「壮举」在 1751 年由庞特普利德的威廉·爱德华兹（William Edwards）实现了，但我认为之后似乎再没有这类事故发生的任何记载。而且，拱对拱基处适度的移动不太敏感。但是，拱基是一定要有的：在松软的地面上建造它们既麻烦又昂贵。

此外，尽管砖石建筑的维护成本通常很低，但其初始成本总是很高，对建造期间需要精心制造拱架的大型桥梁来说，尤其如此。基于这些原因，桥梁领域的人们总是追求某些便宜又令人愉快的东西。在落后的国家，各种悬索桥相当常见，这些桥是用绳缆或其他种类的植物纤维建成的。绳缆悬索桥也被军事工程师用于架设临时的桥梁，其中具有代表性的是伊比利亚半岛战争期间惠灵顿的工程兵架设的悬索桥。

然而，虽然新的绳缆很强韧，是承载张力的可靠材料，但植物纤维制成的绳缆在露天环境中会迅速退化，变得不可靠，就像某些有趣的风云人物在圣路易斯雷大桥附近发现的那样。对永久性的悬索桥来说，铁索或钢缆是必要的。铸铁太脆，钢材直到最近才能在市场上买到，不过锻铁相当强韧，还特别耐腐蚀。

虽然 1741 年在提兹河上用铁链制成了 70 英尺（约 20 米）长的人行桥，但直到 1790 年左右搅炼法被引入，锻铁一般都因太贵而无法广泛用于桥梁建造。此后，锻铁链变得比较便宜。在提兹河大桥上，人们用原始的方式直接在铁链上铺路，致使桥上不能通行车辆，对行人而言也肯定是既陡峭又可怕。以高塔支持缆绳并在缆绳下悬挂路面的现代系统（见图 10–2）是由宾夕法尼亚的詹姆斯·芬利（James Finlay）发明的，他于 1796 年前后开始建造这种桥梁。

图 10–2 悬索桥的现代样式 —— 用缆绳悬挂住水平路面，由詹姆斯·芬利于 1796 年左右发明

悬挂的水平路面加上价格合理的锻铁链，使悬索桥成为宽阔河面上承载过往车辆的一个吸引人的方案。在许多情况下，这些桥梁比大型砖石砌筑桥更便宜也更实用。这个办法在许多地区被广泛采用，尤其是托马斯·特尔福德，他的桥横跨梅奈海峡，于 1825 年落成（见插图 11）；其中心跨度达 550 英尺（约 166 米），是现存最长的桥 [2]。

特尔福德使用的铁链像当时所有用于桥梁的悬链一样，由平板或环构成，用栓或销接合，很像现代自行车链条的环。销接合的应力集中要求材料既有韧性又有延展性，比如锻铁，这种类型的铁链的确非常成功，几乎不会带来任何麻烦。虽然锻铁在拉伸状态下是可靠的，但它不是特别强劲，于是特尔福德明智地将铁链里的最高公称应力降到大约 8 000 psi（55 MN/m2），不到断裂应力的 1/3。

在这些情境中，铁链的大部分强度都用于支撑其自身重量，而特尔福德认为，在运用当时材料的前提下，梅奈悬索桥大致代表了悬索桥的最大安全跨度。虽然布鲁内尔最终证明特尔福德是相当谨慎的 —— 布鲁内尔的克里夫顿悬索桥的跨度为 630 英尺（约 190 米）—— 但梅奈悬索桥的跨度纪录仍保持多年；而且不管怎样，锻铁链的局限性都是显而易见的。

长距离道路悬索桥的新近潮流成为可能，靠的就是高抗拉钢丝的供应。这种材料要比锻铁或低碳钢强劲得多，故而能在更长的长度上支撑其自身重量。高抗拉钢比锻铁更脆，但这是可以接受的，因为钢缆是连续的，不需要使用特别容易开裂的销接合方式。此外，钢缆不像链索那样每个单元只靠三四个平行板彼此连接，它是由数百根分离的钢丝编织而成，任何一根钢丝的失效都不太可能招致危险（见插图 12）。

作为今日人力可及的一个例证，新亨伯高速公路大桥的净跨度长达 4 626 英尺（约 1 388 米），是特尔福德认为的 8 倍多。它的成功倚仗的事实是：悬吊钢丝安全运行的工作应力上限为 85 000 psi 或 580 MN/m2，是特尔福德的锻铁链应力的 10 倍多。

拱与悬索桥中的推力作用线

悬索桥的钢缆会自动选择最佳形状，因为一条柔性绳索别无选择，只能顺从拉伸它的所有载荷的合力。因此，我们能够确定悬索桥钢缆的形状，一种方法是像特尔福德那样通过给它的模型加载，另一种方法是通过在制图版上简单操作「索多边形」。这对设计悬索桥是有用的（例如，我需要知道路面吊弦的合适长度），对设计拱也很有用。

如果我们先看一座悬索桥再看一个拱，不需要太多想象力便可知道，悬索桥其实就是颠倒过来的拱，反之亦然。换言之，如果我们改变拱中所有应力的正负号，即把所有压力转变成张力，这些张力就可由一根呈曲线状的绳索来承载，这可被视为在拉伸状态下定义了一条「推力作用线」。这样一来，我们就能比较轻松地获得拱桥或拱顶的压缩推力作用线。

通过这种方法，我们可以获得各种形状的推力作用线，它们会因负载的细节而略有不同，例如桥上是否有车流。这些推力作用线中的任意一条都是安全的，前提是它完全处于拱环的预期形状范围内，否则就另当别论。略资深的人有时会说，以这种方式得到的拱的推力作用线呈悬链线的形状，因此圆形拱是「错的」。情况不总是这样，在许多情境中，推力作用线非常接近于一段圆弧，这足以证明罗马人建造的高度耐用的半圆形拱是合理的。但是，如果要建造一个确实很薄的拱（现代钢筋混凝土桥梁的惯常做法），那么最好把形状设计得分毫不差，因为推力作用线几乎没有可移动的空间。

弓形主梁的发展

尽管悬索桥是在 19 世纪初迅速起步的，但其发展历程因铁路时代的到来而中断了大约 100 年。在维多利亚时代英格兰建筑的 25 000 座大桥中，绝大部分都是铁路桥。悬索桥是一种高柔性结构，在大的集中载荷的作用下，容易发生危险的形变。对公路桥来说，这个特征没什么大不了的，[3] 但火车的重量一般是货运马车或卡车的上百倍，所以它们引起的挠变很可能也高达百倍，而这是不能接受的。英格兰建造的铁道悬索桥中明显失败的没几座。那时的美国人面对更宽的河面及资金不足而信念有余的状况，在一段时间内坚持修建悬索桥，但最终不得不放弃它们中的大多数。

因此，对桥梁的需求不仅是又轻又便宜，还得有刚性且适宜大跨度。这推动了「系杆拱」或「弓形主梁」的发展（见图 10–3）。拱颇具刚性，但它把相当大的力外推到了拱墩上。如果这些拱墩正好是由坚固的岩石构成的，那么这可能无关紧要，但在铁道施工过程中可能出现的许多情形里，局面却颇为尴尬。尤其不便的是，如果要把一个拱或一组拱架设在又高又细的桥墩上，这些桥墩可能承受不住巨大的侧向载荷。

图 10–3 弓形主梁或系杆拱缓解了桥墩处的侧向推力，它在维多利亚时代的铁道工程师中颇受欢迎

然而，这正是维多利亚时代的工程师经常想做的事，因为他们频繁地让铁路大胆地跨越深谷，有时高度会达到 100 英尺或更多。解决该难题的一个办法是，借助承张构件将拱的两端连接在一起。这可以通过悬吊路面来实现，在这种情况下路面是为自身服务的：路面处于拉伸状态。

弓形主梁乍看就像一个带悬吊路面的普通拱，但其运作方式完全不同。现在，既然没有侧向推力或拉力作用在桥基上，桥基就只需支撑垂直向下的载荷，这些载荷源自主梁和桥上任何车辆的实际重量。事实上，整个结构可被架设在滚子而非刚性桥基上，并且人们通常就是这么做的，主要是为了给金属的热胀冷缩留出余地。因为这样的主梁不会产生纵向推力，所以它们能被架设在较窄的砖石砌柱上。

弓形主梁可被视为完整、独立的单元，这一事实可能大大促进了大型桥梁的建造，因为它使得在远离桥本身的地平面上组装主梁成为可能。之后，人们乘筏将其运送至桥墩处，并借助千斤顶将其抬升到合适的位置。布鲁内尔在处理索尔塔什大桥的跨度问题时就是这样做的。我们将在下一章看到，系杆拱确实是「桁架」或格构梁大家族的又一个成员，结构工程领域中随处可见这些东西。

[1] 在伯克郡洛伯里山上的罗马要塞，距离我撰写这一章的地方约 1 英里处，人们发现一具妇女的遗体被浇筑进地基里。这种做法持续到了近代。1871 年，英格兰的某位利勋爵具有重大嫌疑，人们怀疑他在沃里克郡斯通利的一座桥基里埋了一个「讨厌的家伙」。

[2] 截至本书英文版出版之时，即 1978 年。—— 编者注

[3] 特尔福德的桥都是公路桥或运河桥。美国人将悬索桥广泛地用来跨渠渡槽，水道则是以悬吊木槽输送的。当驳船从桥上经过时，净载荷自然没有变化，挠度也就没有变化。


