## 记忆时间

## 卡片

### 0101. 反常识卡——

这本书的主题核心，就是最大的反常识卡，并且注意时间脉络。

#### 01. 常识

#### 02. 反常识

#### 03. 知识来源

比如提出者，如何演化成型的；书或专栏具体出现的地方。

#### 04. 例子

### 0201. 术语卡——

根据反常识，再补充三个证据——就产生三张术语卡。

例子。

### 0202. 术语卡——

### 0203. 术语卡——

### 0301. 人名卡——

根据这些证据和案例，找出源头和提出术语的人是谁——产生一张人名卡，并且分析他为什么牛，有哪些作品，生平经历是什么。

维基百科链接：有的话。找一个他的 TED 演讲，有的话。

#### 01. 基本信息

用一句话描述你对这个大牛的印象。

#### 02. 贡献及著作

### 0401. 金句卡——

最后根据他写的非常震撼的话语——产生一张金句卡。

### 0501. 行动卡——

行动卡是能够指导自己的行动的卡。

### 0601. 任意卡——

最后还有一张任意卡，记录个人阅读感想。

## 2020014Test-Infected-.md

Test Infected: Programmers Love Writing Tests —— Kent Beck, Erich Gamma

Testing is not closely integrated with development. This prevents you from measuring the progress of development - you can’t tell when something starts working or when something stops working. Using JUnit you can cheaply and incrementally build a test suite that will help you measure your progress, spot unintended side effects, and focus your development efforts.

### Conclusion

This article only scratches the surface of testing. However, it focuses on a style of testing that with a remarkably small investment will make you a faster, more productive, more predictable, and less stressed developer. Once you've been test infected, your attitude toward development is likely to change. Here are some of the changes we have noticed:

There is a huge difference between tests that are all running correctly and tests that aren't. Part of being test infected is not being able to go home if your tests aren't 100%. If you run your suite ten or a hundred times an hour, though, you won't be able to create enough havoc to make you late for supper.

Sometimes you just won’t feel like writing tests, especially at first. Don’t. However, pay attention to how much more trouble you get into, how much more time you spend debugging, and how much more stress you feel when you don’t have tests. We have been amazed at how much more fun programming is and how much more aggressive we are willing to be and how much less stress we feel when we are supported by tests. The difference is dramatic enough to keep us writing tests even when we don’t feel like it.

You will be able to refactor much more aggressively once you have the tests. You won’t understand at first just how much you can do, though. Try to catch yourself saying, "Oh, I see, I should have designed this thus and so. I can’t change it now. I don’t want to break anything." When you say this, save a copy of your current code and give yourself a couple of hours to clean up. (This part works best you can get a buddy to look over your shoulder while you work.) Make your changes, all the while running your tests. You will be surprised at how much ground you can cover in a couple of hours if you aren’t worrying every second about what you might be breaking.

For example, we switched from the Vector-based implementation of MoneyBag to one based on HashTable. We were able to make the switch very quickly and confidently because we had so many tests to rely on. If the tests all worked, we were sure we hadn’t changed the answers the system produced at all.

You will want to get the rest of your team writing tests. The best way we have found to spread the test infection is through direct contact. The next time someone asks you for help debugging, get them to talk about the problem in terms of a fixture and expected results. Then say, "I’d like to write down what you just told me in a form we can use." Have them watch while you write one little test. Run it. Fix it. Write another. Pretty soon they will be writing their own.

So give JUnit a try. If you make it better, please send us the changes so we can spread them around. Our next article will double click on the JUnit framework itself. We will show you how it is constructed, and talk a little about our philosophy of framework development. We would like to thank Martin Fowler, as good a programmer as any analyst can ever hope to be, for his helpful comments in spite of being subjected to early versions of JUnit.

### 01. The Problem

Every programmer knows they should write tests for their code. Few do. The universal response to "Why not?" is "I’m in too much of a hurry." This quickly becomes a vicious cycle - the more pressure you feel, the fewer tests you write. The fewer tests you write, the less productive you are and the less stable you code becomes. The less productive and accurate you are, the more pressure you feel. Programmers burn out from just such cycles. Breaking out requires an outside influence. We found the outside influence we needed in a simple testing framework that lets us do a little testing that makes a big difference.

The best way to convince you of the value of writing your own tests would be to sit down with you and do a bit of development. Along the way, we would encounter new bugs, catch them with tests, fix them, have them come back, fix them again, and so on. You would see the value of the immediate feedback you get from writing and saving and rerunning your own unit tests.

Unfortunately, this is an article, not an office overlooking charming old-town Zürich, with the bustle of medieval commerce outside and the thump of techno from the record store downstairs, so we'll have to simulate the process of development. We'll write a simple program and its tests, and show you the results of running the tests. This way you can get a feel for the process we use and advocate without having to pay for our presence.

### 02. Example

As you read, pay attention to the interplay of the code and the tests. The style here is to write a few lines of code, then a test that should run, or even better, to write a test that won’t run, then write the code that will make it run. The program we write will solve the problem of representing arithmetic with multiple currencies. Arithmetic between single currencies is trivial, you can just add the two amounts. Simple numbers suffice. You can ignore the presence of currencies altogether.

Things get more interesting once multiple currencies are involved. You cannot just convert one currency into another for doing arithmetic since there is no single conversion rate - you may need to compare the value of a portfolio at yesterday’s rate and today’s rate.

Let’s start simple and define a class Money to represent a value in a single currency. We represent the amount by a simple int. To get full accuracy you would probably use double or java.math.BigDecimal to store arbitrary-precision signed decimal numbers. We represent a currency as a string holding the ISO three letter abbreviation (USD, CHF, etc.). In more complex implementations, currency might deserve its own object.

```java
class Money {

    private int fAmount; 
    private String fCurrency;
    
    public Money(int amount, String currency) { 
        fAmount= amount; fCurrency= currency; 
    }
    
    public int amount() { 
        return fAmount; 
    }
    
    public String currency() { 
        return fCurrency; 
    }

}
```

When you add two Moneys of the same currency, the resulting Money has as its amount the sum of the other two amounts.

```java
public Money add(Money m) { 
    return new Money(amount()+m.amount(), currency()); }
```

Now, instead of just coding on, we want to get immediate feedback and practice "code a little, test a little, code a little, test a little". To implement our tests we use the JUnit framework. To write tests you need to get the latest copy JUnit (or write your own equivalent - it’s not so much work).

JUnit defines how to structure your test cases and provides the tools to run them. You implement a test in a subclass of TestCase. To test our Money implementation we therefore define MoneyTest as a subclass of TestCase. In Java, classes are contained in packages and we have to decide where to put MoneyTest. Our current practice is to put MoneyTest in the same package as the classes under test. In this way a test case has access to the package private methods. We add a test method testSimpleAdd, that will exercise the simple version of Money.add() above. A JUnit test method is an ordinary method without any parameters.

1『测试方法不需要传参。』

```java
public class MoneyTest extends TestCase {
    //…
    public void testSimpleAdd() { 
        Money m12CHF= new Money(12, "CHF");     // (1)
        Money m14CHF= new Money(14, "CHF"); 
        Money expected= new Money(26, "CHF"); 
        Money result= m12CHF.add(m14CHF);   // (2)
        assert(expected.equals(result));     // (3)
    }
}
```

The testSimpleAdd() test case consists of:

1. Code which creates the objects we will interact with during the test. This testing context is commonly referred to as a test’s fixture. All we need for the testSimpleAdd test are some Money objects.

2. Code which exercises the objects in the fixture.

3. Code which verifies the result.

Before we can verify the result we have to digress a little since we need a way to test that two Money objects are equal. The Java idiom to do so is to override the method equals defined in Object. Before we implement equals let’s a write a test for equals in MoneyTest.

```java
public void testEquals() {
    Money m12CHF= new Money(12, "CHF"); 
    Money m14CHF= new Money(14, "CHF");
    
    assert(!m12CHF.equals(null)); 
    assert(m12CHF, m12CHF); 
    assertEquals(m12CHF, new Money(12, "CHF")); // (1) 
    assert(!m12CHF.equals(m14CHF));
}
```

The equals method in Object returns true when both objects are the same. However, Money is a value object. Two Monies are considered equal if they have the same currency and value. To test this property we have added a test (1) to verify that Monies are equal when they have the same value but are not the same object. Next let’s write the equals method in Money:

```java
public boolean equals(Object anObject) { 
    if (! anObject instanceof Money) 
        return false; 
    Money aMoney= (Money)anObject; 
    return aMoney.currency().equals(currency()) 
        && amount() == aMoney.amount(); 
}
```

Since equals can receive any kind of object as its argument we first have to check its type before we cast it as a Money. As an aside, it is a recommended practice to also override the method hashCode whenever you override method equals. However, we want to get back to our test case.

With an equals method in hand we can verify the outcome of testSimpleAdd. In JUnit you do so by a calling assert which is inherited from TestCase. Assert triggers a failure that is logged by JUnit when the argument isn’t true. Since assertions for equality are very common, TestCase also defines an assertEquals convenience method. In addition to testing for equality with equals, it logs the printed value of the two objects in the case they differ. This lets us immediately see why a test failed in a JUnit test result report. The value is logged as a string representation created by the toString converter method.

Now that we have implemented two test cases we notice some code duplication for setting-up the tests. It would be nice to reuse some of this test set-up code. In other words, we would like to have a common fixture for running the tests. With JUnit you can do so by storing the fixture’s objects in instance variables of your TestCase class and initialize them by overridding the setUp method. The symmetric operation to setUp is tearDown which you can override to clean up the test fixture at the end of a test. Each test runs in its own fixture and JUnit calls setUp and tearDown for each test so that there can be no side effects among test runs.

```java
public class MoneyTest extends TestCase { 
    private Money f12CHF; 
    private Money f14CHF;
    protected void setUp() { 
        f12CHF= new Money(12, "CHF"); 
        f14CHF= new Money(14, "CHF"); 
    }
}
```

We can rewrite the two test case methods, removing the common setup code:

```java
public void testEquals() { 
    assert(!f12CHF.equals(null)); 
    assertEquals(f12CHF, f12CHF); 
    assertEquals(m12CHF, new Money(12, "CHF")); 
    assert(!f12CHF.equals(f14CHF)); 
}

public void testSimpleAdd() { 
    Money expected= new Money(26, "CHF"); 
    Money result= f12CHF.add(f14CHF); 
    assert(expected.equals(result)); 
}
```

Two additional steps are needed to run the two test cases:

1. define how to run an individual test case.

2. define how to run a test suite.

JUnit supports two ways of running single tests: static and dynamic.

In the static way you override the runTest method inherited from TestCase and call the desired test case. A convenient way to do this is with an anonymous inner class. Note that each test must be given a name, so you can identify it if it fails.

```java
TestCase test= new MoneyTest("simple add") { 
    public void runTest() { 
        testSimpleAdd(); 
    } 
};
```

A template method[1] in the superclass will make sure runTest is executed when the time comes.

The dynamic way to create a test case to be run uses reflection to implement runTest. It assumes the name of the test is the name of the test case method to invoke. It dynamically finds and invokes the test method. To invoke the testSimpleAdd test we therefore construct a MoneyTest as shown below:

    TestCase = new MoneyTest("testSimpleAdd");

The dynamic way is more compact to write but it is less static type safe. An error in the name of the test case goes unnoticed until you run it and get a NoSuchMethodException. Since both approaches have advantages, we decided to leave the choice of which to use up to you.

As the last step to getting both test cases to run together, we have to define a test suite. In JUnit this requires the definition of a static method called suite. The suite method is like a main method that is specialized to run tests. Inside suite you add the tests to be run to a TestSuite object and return it. A TestSuite can run a collection of tests. TestSuite and TestCase both implement an interface called Test which defines the methods to run a test. This enables the creation of test suites by composing arbitrary TestCases and TestSuites. In short TestSuite is a Composite [1]. The code below illustrates the creation of a test suite with the dynamic way to run a test.

```java
public static Test suite() { 
    TestSuite suite= new TestSuite(); 
    suite.addTest(new MoneyTest("testMoneyEquals")); 
    suite.addTest(new MoneyTest("testSimpleAdd")); 
    return suite; 
}
```

Here is the corresponding code using the static way.

```java
public static Test suite() {
    TestSuite suite= new TestSuite(); 
    suite.addTest(
        new MoneyTest("money equals") {
            protected void runTest() { testMoneyEquals(); }
        }
     );
    
    suite.addTest( 
        new MoneyTest("simple add") { 
            protected void runTest() { testSimpleAdd(); } 
        } 
    ); 
    return suite;
}
```

Now we are ready to run our tests. JUnit comes with a graphical interface to run tests. Type the name of your test class in the field at the top of the window. Press the Run button. While the test is run JUnit shows its progress with a progress bar below the input field. The bar is initially green but turns into red as soon as there is an unsuccessful test. Failed tests are shown in a list at the bottom. Figure 1 shows the TestRunner window after we run our trivial test suite.

After having verified that the simple currency case works we move on to multiple currencies. As mentioned above the problem of mixed currency arithmetic is that there isn’t a single exchange rate. To avoid this problem we introduce a MoneyBag which defers exchange rate conversions. For example adding 12 Swiss Francs to 14 US Dollars is represented as a bag containing the two Monies 12 CHF and 14 USD. Adding another 10 Swiss francs gives a bag with 22 CHF and 14 USD. We can later evaluate a MoneyBag with different exchange rates.

A MoneyBag is represented as a list of Monies and provides different constructors to create a MoneyBag. Note, that the constructors are package private since MoneyBags are created behind the scenes when doing currency arithmetic.













