## 记忆时间

## 目录

20201130How-to-Think-For-Yourself.md

## 20201130How-to-Think-For-Yourself.md

November 2020

There are some kinds of work that you can't do well without thinking differently from your peers. To be a successful scientist, for example, it's not enough just to be correct. Your ideas have to be both correct and novel. You can't publish papers saying things other people already know. You need to say things no one else has realized yet.

The same is true for investors. It's not enough for a public market investor to predict correctly how a company will do. If a lot of other people make the same prediction, the stock price will already reflect it, and there's no room to make money. The only valuable insights are the ones most other investors don't share.

You see this pattern with startup founders too. You don't want to start a startup to do something that everyone agrees is a good idea, or there will already be other companies doing it. You have to do something that sounds to most other people like a bad idea, but that you know isn't — like writing software for a tiny computer used by a few thousand hobbyists, or starting a site to let people rent airbeds on strangers' floors.

Ditto for essayists. An essay that told people things they already knew would be boring. You have to tell them something new. 

3『上面的 something new 的连接：[How to Write Usefully](http://www.paulgraham.com/useful.html)。』

But this pattern isn't universal. In fact, it doesn't hold for most kinds of work. In most kinds of work — to be an administrator, for example — all you need is the first half. All you need is to be right. It's not essential that everyone else be wrong.

There's room for a little novelty in most kinds of work, but in practice there's a fairly sharp distinction between the kinds of work where it's essential to be independent-minded, and the kinds where it's not.

I wish someone had told me about this distinction when I was a kid, because it's one of the most important things to think about when you're deciding what kind of work you want to do. Do you want to do the kind of work where you can only win by thinking differently from everyone else? I suspect most people's unconscious mind will answer that question before their conscious mind has a chance to. I know mine does.

Independent-mindedness seems to be more a matter of nature than nurture. Which means if you pick the wrong type of work, you're going to be unhappy. If you're naturally independent-minded, you're going to find it frustrating to be a middle manager. And if you're naturally conventional-minded, you're going to be sailing into a headwind if you try to do original research.

One difficulty here, though, is that people are often mistaken about where they fall on the spectrum from conventional- to independent-minded. Conventional-minded people don't like to think of themselves as conventional-minded. And in any case, it genuinely feels to them as if they make up their own minds about everything. It's just a coincidence that their beliefs are identical to their peers'. And the independent-minded, meanwhile, are often unaware how different their ideas are from conventional ones, at least till they state them publicly. [1]

By the time they reach adulthood, most people know roughly how smart they are (in the narrow sense of ability to solve pre-set problems), because they're constantly being tested and ranked according to it. But schools generally ignore independent-mindedness, except to the extent they try to suppress it. So we don't get anything like the same kind of feedback about how independent-minded we are.

There may even be a phenomenon like Dunning-Kruger at work, where the most conventional-minded people are confident that they're independent-minded, while the genuinely independent-minded worry they might not be independent-minded enough.

___________


Can you make yourself more independent-minded? I think so. This quality may be largely inborn, but there seem to be ways to magnify it, or at least not to suppress it.

One of the most effective techniques is one practiced unintentionally by most nerds: simply to be less aware what conventional beliefs are. It's hard to be a conformist if you don't know what you're supposed to conform to. Though again, it may be that such people already are independent-minded. A conventional-minded person would probably feel anxious not knowing what other people thought, and make more effort to find out.

It matters a lot who you surround yourself with. If you're surrounded by conventional-minded people, it will constrain which ideas you can express, and that in turn will constrain which ideas you have. But if you surround yourself with independent-minded people, you'll have the opposite experience: hearing other people say surprising things will encourage you to, and to think of more.

Because the independent-minded find it uncomfortable to be surrounded by conventional-minded people, they tend to self-segregate once they have a chance to. The problem with high school is that they haven't yet had a chance to. Plus high school tends to be an inward-looking little world whose inhabitants lack confidence, both of which magnify the forces of conformism. And so high school is often a bad time for the independent-minded. But there is some advantage even here: it teaches you what to avoid. If you later find yourself in a situation that makes you think "this is like high school," you know you should get out. [2]

3『上面信息里的 bad time 相关的链接：[Why Nerds are Unpopular](http://www.paulgraham.com/nerds.html)。』

Another place where the independent- and conventional-minded are thrown together is in successful startups. The founders and early employees are almost always independent-minded; otherwise the startup wouldn't be successful. But conventional-minded people greatly outnumber independent-minded ones, so as the company grows, the original spirit of independent-mindedness is inevitably diluted. This causes all kinds of problems besides the obvious one that the company starts to suck. One of the strangest is that the founders find themselves able to speak more freely with founders of other companies than with their own employees. [3]

Fortunately you don't have to spend all your time with independent-minded people. It's enough to have one or two you can talk to regularly. And once you find them, they're usually as eager to talk as you are; they need you too. Although universities no longer have the kind of monopoly they used to have on education, good universities are still an excellent way to meet independent-minded people. Most students will still be conventional-minded, but you'll at least find clumps of independent-minded ones, rather than the near zero you may have found in high school.

It also works to go in the other direction: as well as cultivating a small collection of independent-minded friends, to try to meet as many different types of people as you can. It will decrease the influence of your immediate peers if you have several other groups of peers. Plus if you're part of several different worlds, you can often import ideas from one to another.

But by different types of people, I don't mean demographically different. For this technique to work, they have to think differently. So while it's an excellent idea to go and visit other countries, you can probably find people who think differently right around the corner. When I meet someone who knows a lot about something unusual (which includes practically everyone, if you dig deep enough), I try to learn what they know that other people don't. There are almost always surprises here. It's a good way to make conversation when you meet strangers, but I don't do it to make conversation. I really want to know.

You can expand the source of influences in time as well as space, by reading history. When I read history I do it not just to learn what happened, but to try to get inside the heads of people who lived in the past. How did things look to them? This is hard to do, but worth the effort for the same reason it's worth travelling far to triangulate a point.

You can also take more explicit measures to prevent yourself from automatically adopting conventional opinions. The most general is to cultivate an attitude of skepticism. When you hear someone say something, stop and ask yourself "Is that true?" Don't say it out loud. I'm not suggesting that you impose on everyone who talks to you the burden of proving what they say, but rather that you take upon yourself the burden of evaluating what they say.

Treat it as a puzzle. You know that some accepted ideas will later turn out to be wrong. See if you can guess which. The end goal is not to find flaws in the things you're told, but to find the new ideas that had been concealed by the broken ones. So this game should be an exciting quest for novelty, not a boring protocol for intellectual hygiene. And you'll be surprised, when you start asking "Is this true?", how often the answer is not an immediate yes. If you have any imagination, you're more likely to have too many leads to follow than too few.

More generally your goal should be not to let anything into your head unexamined, and things don't always enter your head in the form of statements. Some of the most powerful influences are implicit. How do you even notice these? By standing back and watching how other people get their ideas.

When you stand back at a sufficient distance, you can see ideas spreading through groups of people like waves. The most obvious are in fashion: you notice a few people wearing a certain kind of shirt, and then more and more, until half the people around you are wearing the same shirt. You may not care much what you wear, but there are intellectual fashions too, and you definitely don't want to participate in those. Not just because you want sovereignty over your own thoughts, but because unfashionable ideas are disproportionately likely to lead somewhere interesting. The best place to find undiscovered ideas is where no one else is looking. [4]

3『上面信息里的 unfashionable 相关的链接为：[Novelty and Heresy](http://www.paulgraham.com/nov.html)。』

___________

To go beyond this general advice, we need to look at the internal structure of independent-mindedness — at the individual muscles we need to exercise, as it were. It seems to me that it has three components: fastidiousness about truth, resistance to being told what to think, and curiosity.

Fastidiousness about truth means more than just not believing things that are false. It means being careful about degree of belief. For most people, degree of belief rushes unexamined toward the extremes: the unlikely becomes impossible, and the probable becomes certain. [5] To the independent-minded, this seems unpardonably sloppy. They're willing to have anything in their heads, from highly speculative hypotheses to (apparent) tautologies, but on subjects they care about, everything has to be labelled with a carefully considered degree of belief. [6]

The independent-minded thus have a horror of ideologies, which require one to accept a whole collection of beliefs at once, and to treat them as articles of faith. To an independent-minded person that would seem revolting, just as it would seem to someone fastidious about food to take a bite of a submarine sandwich filled with a large variety of ingredients of indeterminate age and provenance.

Without this fastidiousness about truth, you can't be truly independent-minded. It's not enough just to have resistance to being told what to think. Those kind of people reject conventional ideas only to replace them with the most random conspiracy theories. And since these conspiracy theories have often been manufactured to capture them, they end up being less independent-minded than ordinary people, because they're subject to a much more exacting master than mere convention. [7]

Can you increase your fastidiousness about truth? I would think so. In my experience, merely thinking about something you're fastidious about causes that fastidiousness to grow. If so, this is one of those rare virtues we can have more of merely by wanting it. And if it's like other forms of fastidiousness, it should also be possible to encourage in children. I certainly got a strong dose of it from my father. [8]

The second component of independent-mindedness, resistance to being told what to think, is the most visible of the three. But even this is often misunderstood. The big mistake people make about it is to think of it as a merely negative quality. The language we use reinforces that idea. You're unconventional. You don't care what other people think. But it's not just a kind of immunity. In the most independent-minded people, the desire not to be told what to think is a positive force. It's not mere skepticism, but an active delight in ideas that subvert the conventional wisdom, the more counterintuitive the better.

Some of the most novel ideas seemed at the time almost like practical jokes. Think how often your reaction to a novel idea is to laugh. I don't think it's because novel ideas are funny per se, but because novelty and humor share a certain kind of surprisingness. But while not identical, the two are close enough that there is a definite correlation between having a sense of humor and being independent-minded — just as there is between being humorless and being conventional-minded. [9]

I don't think we can significantly increase our resistance to being told what to think. It seems the most innate of the three components of independent-mindedness; people who have this quality as adults usually showed all too visible signs of it as children. But if we can't increase our resistance to being told what to think, we can at least shore it up, by surrounding ourselves with other independent-minded people.

The third component of independent-mindedness, curiosity, may be the most interesting. To the extent that we can give a brief answer to the question of where novel ideas come from, it's curiosity. That's what people are usually feeling before having them.

In my experience, independent-mindedness and curiosity predict one another perfectly. Everyone I know who's independent-minded is deeply curious, and everyone I know who's conventional-minded isn't. Except, curiously, children. All small children are curious. Perhaps the reason is that even the conventional-minded have to be curious in the beginning, in order to learn what the conventions are. Whereas the independent-minded are the gluttons of curiosity, who keep eating even after they're full. [10]

The three components of independent-mindedness work in concert: fastidiousness about truth and resistance to being told what to think leave space in your brain, and curiosity finds new ideas to fill it.

Interestingly, the three components can substitute for one another in much the same way muscles can. If you're sufficiently fastidious about truth, you don't need to be as resistant to being told what to think, because fastidiousness alone will create sufficient gaps in your knowledge. And either one can compensate for curiosity, because if you create enough space in your brain, your discomfort at the resulting vacuum will add force to your curiosity. Or curiosity can compensate for them: if you're sufficiently curious, you don't need to clear space in your brain, because the new ideas you discover will push out the conventional ones you acquired by default.

Because the components of independent-mindedness are so interchangeable, you can have them to varying degrees and still get the same result. So there is not just a single model of independent-mindedness. Some independent-minded people are openly subversive, and others are quietly curious. They all know the secret handshake though.

Is there a way to cultivate curiosity? To start with, you want to avoid situations that suppress it. How much does the work you're currently doing engage your curiosity? If the answer is "not much," maybe you should change something.

The most important active step you can take to cultivate your curiosity is probably to seek out the topics that engage it. Few adults are equally curious about everything, and it doesn't seem as if you can choose which topics interest you. So it's up to you to find them. Or invent them, if necessary.

Another way to increase your curiosity is to indulge it, by investigating things you're interested in. Curiosity is unlike most other appetites in this respect: indulging it tends to increase rather than to sate it. Questions lead to more questions.

Curiosity seems to be more individual than fastidiousness about truth or resistance to being told what to think. To the degree people have the latter two, they're usually pretty general, whereas different people can be curious about very different things. So perhaps curiosity is the compass here. Perhaps, if your goal is to discover novel ideas, your motto should not be "do what you love" so much as "do what you're curious about."

### Notes

[1] One convenient consequence of the fact that no one identifies as conventional-minded is that you can say what you like about conventional-minded people without getting in too much trouble. When I wrote "The Four Quadrants of Conformism" I expected a firestorm of rage from the aggressively conventional-minded, but in fact it was quite muted. They sensed that there was something about the essay that they disliked intensely, but they had a hard time finding a specific passage to pin it on.

[2] When I ask myself what in my life is like high school, the answer is Twitter. It's not just full of conventional-minded people, as anything its size will inevitably be, but subject to violent storms of conventional-mindedness that remind me of descriptions of Jupiter. But while it probably is a net loss to spend time there, it has at least made me think more about the distinction between independent- and conventional-mindedness, which I probably wouldn't have done otherwise.

[3] The decrease in independent-mindedness in growing startups is still an open problem, but there may be solutions.

Founders can delay the problem by making a conscious effort only to hire independent-minded people. Which of course also has the ancillary benefit that they have better ideas.

Another possible solution is to create policies that somehow disrupt the force of conformism, much as control rods slow chain reactions, so that the conventional-minded aren't as dangerous. The physical separation of Lockheed's Skunk Works may have had this as a side benefit. Recent examples suggest employee forums like Slack may not be an unmitigated good.

The most radical solution would be to grow revenues without growing the company. You think hiring that junior PR person will be cheap, compared to a programmer, but what will be the effect on the average level of independent-mindedness in your company? (The growth in staff relative to faculty seems to have had a similar effect on universities.) Perhaps the rule about outsourcing work that's not your "core competency" should be augmented by one about outsourcing work done by people who'd ruin your culture as employees.

Some investment firms already seem to be able to grow revenues without growing the number of employees. Automation plus the ever increasing articulation of the "tech stack" suggest this may one day be possible for product companies.

[4] There are intellectual fashions in every field, but their influence varies. One of the reasons politics, for example, tends to be boring is that it's so extremely subject to them. The threshold for having opinions about politics is much lower than the one for having opinions about set theory. So while there are some ideas in politics, in practice they tend to be swamped by waves of intellectual fashion.

[5] The conventional-minded are often fooled by the strength of their opinions into believing that they're independent-minded. But strong convictions are not a sign of independent-mindedness. Rather the opposite.

[6] Fastidiousness about truth doesn't imply that an independent-minded person won't be dishonest, but that he won't be deluded. It's sort of like the definition of a gentleman as someone who is never unintentionally rude.

[7] You see this especially among political extremists. They think themselves nonconformists, but actually they're niche conformists. Their opinions may be different from the average person's, but they are often more influenced by their peers' opinions than the average person's are.

[8] If we broaden the concept of fastidiousness about truth so that it excludes pandering, bogusness, and pomposity as well as falsehood in the strict sense, our model of independent-mindedness can expand further into the arts.

[9] This correlation is far from perfect, though. Gödel and Dirac don't seem to have been very strong in the humor department. But someone who is both "neurotypical" and humorless is very likely to be conventional-minded.

[10] Exception: gossip. Almost everyone is curious about gossip.

Thanks to Trevor Blackwell, Paul Buchheit, Patrick Collison, Jessica Livingston, Robert Morris, Harj Taggar, and Peter Thiel for reading drafts of this.

## 20201204王煜全聊广告.md

摘自得到的知识城邦

同意万老师说的，广告/大众宣传的价值没有想象的那么大，但也不同意过度看低广告/大众宣传的价值，它也没有想象的那么小：

1、广告给了我们行动的理由，人都不是百分之百相信某件事和百分之百决定做某件事的，广告传递了「做这件事是对的」的信息，赋予了大家也这么想和这么做的正当性。美国的孤立主义抬头和两党情绪对立，固然公众本来有这样的情绪，但不得不说特朗普也是有助推作用的。

2、助推有时候是关键作用，是否有助推差别巨大。虽然二战前德国青年有排犹情绪，但未必会上街，电台广告和大规模集会宣传无疑助长了他们的行动。而调研只是问人的态度，没有调查到人们的行动意愿。而某个运动从来不需要所有人都支持，只是需要有足够数量的参与者，这时广告的告知无疑对群体行动有推波助澜的作用，戈培尔做为纳粹德国的二号人物是有原因的，因为他把狂热者集中起来，坚定了他们的狂热，而且带动了并非百分之百狂热者的参与。美国竞选的核心也常常是摇摆者，要说法摇摆者，用狂轰乱炸的广告证明自己的正当性是很重要的。

3、广告在传递信息的同时也能传递一部分的论证，如果论证很充分，很多人是愿意转变的（尤其是摇摆者，但在消费领域摇摆者往往数量巨大，真正的品牌忠诚者反倒是少数），而确实有很多「道理」本身未必成立，公众却更愿意相信（这个好像万老师以前也讲过），所以善于「讲道理」的广告也是有价值的。

所以，不能把广告简单归结为一是告知二是影响，告知有效影响无效。事情其实更复杂，广告还可以有造势的作用（中国很多广告是给地方经销商坚定信念用的，也算是一种造势吧），还可以有说服摇摆者的作用，还可以有聚集相信者的作用（互联网时代世界从信息传播的角度没有更平，就是因为形成了很多自我强化的小群体）......

另外，我上网查了查，没有查到 Cambridge Analytica 无效的介绍，万老师能否详细讲讲？这在未来的网络世界里可是非常重要的啊！要能给出您的信息出处就更感谢了！

## 20201224芒格最新访谈.md

[芒格最新访谈：对中国进行了非常大的投资，从现在开始的一年，最糟糕的情况将会彻底地被抛在后面](https://mp.weixin.qq.com/s/vEpgqIN8c3VtVh10HHQkdg)

最近，我有一个朋友给我寄了一件中国制造的蓝色西装外套，在中国互联网上购买，售价 42 美元，我已经收到了。它可能不是一件完美的西装外套，但对于 42 美元的西装外套来说很了不起了。我朋友一下子就给了工厂下了 100000 单，并已经通过互联网预售。

我投资了一些美国公司，它们在中国做生意，包括可口可乐。但是，我也通过李录管理的基金对中国进行了非常大的投资。李录成立了一家小型私募股权公司来投资中国，我们是他的坚实后盾。他的投资记录非常成功，我非常关注。当然，我在中国的头部公司这里也有非常成功的经验，这也可能会持续下去。中国的故事就很奇葩，没有一个其他大国成功了这么长的时间。

科学技术既是机会，也是杀手。我第一个投资经历差点弄死我。很长一段时间内，我都避免在前沿技术领域内进行风投。

例如伯克希尔的铁路业务。几乎没有比铁路更古老的业务了，但是我们将要建造另一条新铁路，这对我们来说是一项非常好的资产。重大变化可能会带来伤害。我们取得成功不是通过征服变革，而是通过避免变革。在铁路业务中运用新技术是很聪明的。想象一下人们能在现有的铁路上坐上双层火车，所有的火车变高，隧道的高度也在提高等等。突然之间，我们就能以很少的成本获得了两倍的增量。

选择职业生涯非常重要。如果你进入了对你来说特别困难的行业，你可能不会做得好。如果做你喜欢并擅长的工作，你将会有很大优势。

每个人都在使用技术，但是站在一个无法被技术赶走的位置也很重要。

如果您想避免很多愚蠢的错误，那就是要知道自己对什么有信心、对什么没有信心，要知道自己的能力。这很难做到，因为人的思维会自然而然地认为，自己比真实的情况更聪明。

这些变化一直对某些投资者不利，就在线购物的变化而言尤其糟糕。不过在上一个季度，Costco 的线上销售额比去年同期增长了 86％。这是个重大发展，这对其他零售商有好处吗？不，对 Costco 超市有好处，但对其他人却不利。Costco 低廉的价格和高效率对于其他零售店来说具有极大的破坏力。现在大家都在做这些互联网的工作。我要在零售行业中做的最后一件事可能是与 Costco 合作。

以上是查理·芒格在 12 月 14 日的加州理工访谈中阐述的观点，保持一贯的芒格风格，金句频出，风格犀利，智慧无穷。

聪明投资者精心翻译了访谈全文：

### 01. 选择职业生涯非常重要

主持人：作为一名投资者，查理，现在您已经取得了惊人的成功。我们可以从您离开军队的那段时间开始回顾。战争结束时，你决定不返回密歇根州的学数学，也不去其他地方上大学。相反，你去了法学院。在职业生涯选择方面，你有什么建议？

芒格：选择职业生涯非常重要。如果你进入了对你来说特别困难的行业，你可能不会做得好。如果做你喜欢并擅长的工作，你将会有很大优势。我之所以学习法律，是因为我不想当外科医生。我虽然对法律执业有不满意的地方，但是我要养孩子，家里却没有钱。因此，我不得不为了孩子而打拼，有点困难。在法律界，我的眼界具有局限性，收入也少得可怜，但我一直在大胆而明智地进行投资。

在最初的 13 年里，我积累了很多的流动投资，这些投资是在我过去的律师生涯中进行的，我在业余时间用这些小小的钱做到了这一点。其中部分原因是沃伦·巴菲特的成功。

我发现我应该开始为自己、而不是为别人工作，如果做全职会怎么样呢？

### 02. 全民参与投资不是一件好事

主持人：在过去的几个世纪中，技术变革推动了美国经济的许多增长。但是从您的角度来看，作为一名投资者，在过去 75 年中看到的最戏剧性的变化是？

芒格：我经历了巨大的经济的扩张和繁荣。这非常有趣。政府试图做些事情来减轻波动、使经济增长得更快。当然，这也产生了一定的通胀、持续的时间足以和我的年纪差不多长了。而且在投资领域正在发生的事情是，有很多人参与其中。人们在疯狂的投资活动中赚了很多钱。

坦白说，当我年轻的时候，没什么聪明人。现在，几乎每个人都很聪明，人们都被金钱的诱惑吸引进入了投资界。这是一个巨大的、非常重要的发展。但我本人根本不欢迎它。我不希望整个世界都试图通过这种方式致富。但这就是发生的事情。而且，人们也开始疯狂地猜测市场。这很有趣，但并非都很好。

### 03. 前沿科技既是机会也是杀手

主持人：您进行投资，便会将钱交到企业家手中。谁会真正生产出某种东西？价值投资和金融业内的纯套利手段是不是有什么共同的特性呢？

芒格：我并没有在前沿科技上大赚一笔。我前期投资了一家在帕萨迪纳的公司，好在我没有失去我所有的钱。科学技术既是机会，也是杀手。我第一个投资经历差点弄死我。很长一段时间内，我都避免在前沿技术领域内进行风投。

主持人：在您处理的公司中，其中一些公司还是某段时间的市场领导者。正如您刚才所建议的那样，由于技术的变化或偏好的变化，大家会吞噬那些市场份额比以前少的公司。那么，从长远来看人们对此有何看法？

芒格：长远来看，美国公司的运作可以类比生物学。所有个体、物种都会死亡，这只是时间问题。经济发展也是一样。新事物会不断出现，同时一些事物开始死亡。这就是长期投资环境使它变得非常有趣的原因。看看现在有哪些「死掉」的事物：所有百货公司、所有报纸。真的就和生物学一样的，企业也只有很小的力量、很少的时间。

### 04. 谨慎看待重大变革

主持人：那么，一个人如何应对变化呢？我一直问我的学生这个问题。

芒格：有些人试图抓住变革的前沿。因此，有人在尝试新机会，而不是等着被摧毁，比如谷歌和苹果等等。而像我这样的人，从某种程度上来说我们会逃避做类似像加入像苹果这样的事情。我们认为的重大变化可能会带来伤害。例如伯克希尔的铁路业务。几乎没有比铁路更古老的业务了，但是我们将要建造另一条新铁路，这对我们来说是一项非常好的资产。

我们取得成功不是通过征服变革，而是通过避免变革。在铁路业务中运用新技术是很聪明的。想象一下人们能在现有的铁路上坐上双层火车，所有的火车变高，隧道的高度也在提高等等。突然之间，我们就能以很少的成本获得了两倍的增量。每个人都在使用技术，但是站在一个无法被技术赶走的位置也很重要。除了铁路，您还要如何把货物从洛杉矶港口运送到其他地方？

主持人：所以说我们要寻找经济中的创新，而不是寻找新的经济。这是人们可以思考的另一种方式吗？

芒格：有不同的方式可以通向成功的投资。所有成功的投资，都是在尝试涉足价值超出支付的事物。有很多不同的方法可以找到价值不菲的产品。

### 05. 了解自己的能力，避免偏见

主持人：您还反复谈论了人们的心理偏见。如您所说，您不想成为最聪明的人，但也想避免做愚蠢的事情。所以一个人在决策时如何防范精心理偏见？

芒格：我一生都在努力避免自己的心理偏见。我会犯错，但我会尝试使其保持在一个简单和基础的水平。我很喜欢「安全边际」事物概念，我想避免变得愚蠢。

主持人：所以说想要避免偏见的重要因素之一，就是人们必须接受自己有能力的限制？

芒格：我要说的最重要的是，如果您想避免很多愚蠢的错误，那就是要知道自己对什么有信心、对什么没有信心，要知道自己的能力。这很难做到，因为人的思维会自然而然地认为，自己比真实的情况更聪明。

### 06. 怎么走好未来的路

主持人：金融这个行业经历了几次动荡和彻底的改变。回到你出生的时候，美国有 30,000 家银行，它们都不是非常大。现在，排名前 20 位的银行几乎囊括了所有。但是创新和金融的范围非常广泛。金融学中存在一场辩论，即创新有多少对市场有帮助，而有多少却造成了不稳定。您怎么看？

芒格：我对此有很明确的看法。我认为，美国银行做的早期创新能够帮助经济、帮助所有人。但是现在银行想赚大钱成为投机者。我认为这些发展不会再有更大空间了。我还是更喜欢谨慎地避免损失的银行业务。

### 07. 从现在开始的一年，最糟糕的情况将会彻底地被抛在后面

主持人：我还有一个问题，我想很多人都想过，新冠疫情对美国社会经济造成了极大的破坏。您如何看待这个困难重重的时期？未来 12 个月内经济是否将会崛起？我们已经看到开始发生的变化中，多少将是持久的？

芒格：我对此的看法并不比其他任何人都要好。但是，我认为从现在开始的一年，最糟糕的情况将会彻底地被抛在后面。我见证了小儿麻痹症被疫苗完全杀死。我认为疫苗将会迅速传播到世界各地。所以我认为这一系列可怕的事情很可能在明年有转机。

主持人：您怎么看零售业的转型？百货商店不见了，但零售业的似乎有了大规模变革。我们会回到过去的旧模式，还是转向在线零售？

芒格：线下零售已经存在了数千年，不会轻易消失。当然，由于互联网的普及，这是一个很难赚钱的地方。最近，我有一个朋友给我寄了一件中国制造的蓝色西装外套，在中国互联网上购买，售价 42 美元，我已经收到了。它可能不是一件完美西装外套，但对于 42 美元的西装外套来说很了不起了。我朋友一下子就给了工厂下了 100,000 单，并已经通过互联网预售。因此，这是以最极端的一种杀死所有竞争对手的方式。我认为这些线上销售将继续存在，我们将变得越来越有效率。

主持人：所以这实际上可能对消费者有利，但对某些投资者而言则更为困难，特别是贸易行业？

芒格：这些变化一直对某些投资者不利，就在线购物的变化而言尤其糟糕。不过在上一个季度，Costco 的线上销售额比去年同期增长了 86％。这是个重大发展，这对其他零售商有好处吗？

不，对 Costco 超市有好处，但对其他人却不利。Costco 低廉的价格和高效率对于其他零售店来说具有极大的破坏力。现在大家都在做这些互联网的工作。我要在零售行业中做的最后一件事可能是与 Costco 合作。

### 08. 我们希望发现新道路，而不是变成当下潮流的受害者

主持人：您还认为，美国劳动力的重组将是一种更短暂的现象，一旦我们接种了疫苗，工作机会就回来了，否则我们只可能会像 2001 年一样缓慢的就业回升？

芒格：我没有像其他人那样通过预测宏观经济变化而发大财。但是我们买了很有前途的东西。有时候我们受到经济的不利影响，有时受到有利影响。无论哪种方式，我们都保持前进，这是一个系统。我们希望发现新道路，而不是变成当下潮流的受害者，我们也希望，我们对自己认为真正重要的研究有自己的决定。

主持人：接下来是来自观众的一些问题。您是否做出过错误的业务决策？

芒格：我的确做出过错误的商业决策。但我们成功路上，在困难的事情上犯错是不可避免的，这是游戏的本质而已，你永远不可能有足够多的勇气去避免所有错误。

主持人：聪明的人对未来的预测是否比其他人更好？

芒格：这是一个非常有趣的问题。很多「聪明人」都自以为自己很聪明，因此做得更糟。沃伦和我一直很擅长避免那种情况。我们知道自己的能力如何。当我在加州理工学院学习时，我上了乔·斯图尔特（Joel Stewart）的热力学课程。我从中学到的一件事是，无论我多么努力，我都永远无法成为像乔·斯图尔特（Joe Stewart）那样的热力学专家，我甚至从未考虑过尝试与热力学专家们竞争。

主持人：气象学研究如何影响您的思维？

芒格：不多。其实你做任何事情都能从中学到东西。在当时，气象学是一门非常讲究经验主义的科学：我们制作天气图、在地图上画天气。通过一个接一个的地图，我们可以看到天气的变化，那就是我们预测天气的方式。这总比没有好得多。而且，我们确实有一些预测结冰的小技巧等等。

基本上，我们只是在做两件事：让飞行员不要去某个会因为无法降落而摔死的地方，让飞行员不要去冰天雪地的地方。我们回到气候科学领域，近年气象学存在很多分歧。我们每个人正努力在全球气候的长期演变过程中建立更好的预测模型，但事实证明这非常困难，先进文明可以应付全球气候，而这也可能发生最坏情况。

建一个海堤来保护美国总统，都用不着花掉这么多年的人均 GDP。但如果必须这样做的话，也可以很安全地完成，我不认为气候问题是人类可能遭受的最严重的悲剧。

### 09. 让本科教育保持很小规模并使研究生教育如此出色是非常明智的

主持人：我们的下一个问题：加州理工学院以及其校友将来会如何发展？

芒格：我认为加州理工的状况一直很好，它的巨大优势之一就是它不会改变太多。我认为让本科教育保持很小规模并使研究生教育如此出色是非常明智的。换句话说，我认为不做太大改变的想法是相当合理的，也是优势之一。

原因之一是，过去我们很想专注于具有不同背景和不同学科的人们彼此交谈的能力。因为我们认为，他们能碰撞出关于世界、科学或工程的新思维方式，这是我们试图优先完成的事情之一。但是，也存在这样一种情况：规模性对于投资机会的思考或其他类型的活动至关重要。

你的思考中、有多少是来自各种不同来源的信息？交叉检查你要做出的决定。我非常喜欢了解伟大的创意以及几乎所有学科，我很容易吸收这些知识，然后在判断中使用这些，这就是我的系统。而且，我不信任专家，我不相信仅靠不停地咨询专家来做事。在投资决策中，我认为自己对于伟大想法和跨学科的适应性非常有帮助。

我认为这也更有趣：我发现学术界也不太擅长跨学科的知识，研究人员正在了解越来越少的知识。没有办法，这确实存在困难。而我们试图做到这一点，这是我们前进的道路上不可避免的一部分。但是，如果你离开了你自己的专属领域，这是很危险的。

### 10. 回报率在下降，离玩火很近了

主持人：我的下一组问题更多注重金融方面。您预计未来十年的股票市场回报率将低于过去十年，为什么？

芒格：疯狂的人太多了。而且管理系统也很愚蠢，以至于我认为它不会奏效。我认为回报会下降，实际回报会更低。

主持人：有两个不同的问题。您如何看待量化宽松政策与庞大的财政赤字的组合？它们会将我们带向何方？

芒格：我有一个非常简单的答案：我们在未知的水域里，没有人能像现在这样赚钱。在很长一段时间内，没有任何麻烦。我认为我们离玩火很近。一些欧洲政府最近以 1％ 的利率借了 100 年期的债，这太奇怪了。

主持人：自从二战结束以来，世界正在飞速发展经济。您认为如今全球经济的规则和以前相比是否有所改变？

芒格：当然，它在某种程度上有所改变，因为它们只是来了。经济非常富裕。在我的一生中，它发生了巨大的变化。先进的文明取得了比以往任何世纪都更快的进步，这令人难以置信。我见证了这一切，因为我活了很久。我记得我小时候在奥马哈吃五道菜的晚餐只要花 60 美分。现在世界真的改变了，我们积累了很多财富。

主持人：纳斯达克指数是否存在泡沫？泡沫会爆炸吗？我们能知道纳斯达克指数何时出现泡沫吗？

芒格：没人知道什么时候泡沫会炸掉。但，它是纳指并不意味着它还会进行像之前的市场那样的运作，这又令人难以置信，以前从来没有像现在这样。另一件事真的很了不起。在过去的 30 年中，中国实现了实际的经济增长，成为世界历史上从未有过的大国。

这是谁做的？这些中国人真的很了不起。你学习金融，就要考虑很多奇怪的事情。

### 11. 我在中国有非常大的投资

主持人：您如何评价在中国的投资呢？基于当前的政治紧张局势，您是否通过在中国开展业务的美国公司的所有权投资中国？

芒格：我投资了一些美国公司，它们在中国做生意，包括可口可乐。但是，我也通过李录的管理基金对中国进行了非常大的投资。李录成立了一家小型私募股权公司来投资中国，我们是他的坚实后盾。他的投资记录非常成功，我非常关注。当然，我在中国的头部公司这里也有非常成功的经验，这也可能会持续下去。中国的故事就很奇葩，没有一个其他大国成功了这么长的时间。

主持人：这或许是某种政治因素吗？

芒格：对，这其实是非常有趣的观察。谁能想到一群共产党人会领导出世界上见过最好的经济记录？

主持人：最后一个问题，接下来的 30 到 40 年中，您对什么最好奇？

芒格：我长期以来一直是投资者，我对古怪的现状很有兴趣，这些怪异的经济状况与印钞一样疯狂，当然最后也很有趣。我对世界已经发展得很远了这一事实感兴趣。而且，我也对让像中国一样的发展中国家迅速发展有兴趣。相比之下，尽管印度人民获得了更多的言论，但其经济表现却差很多。我认为现代世界的经济发展非常有趣。这是一个非常有趣的主题。我明白为什么这么多经济学家喜欢它，因为它是如此令人困惑和有趣，并且成就如此之大。

而且我认为许多技术都是以同样有趣的方式在发展。谁能想到整个世界都会在 Zoom 上进行沟通合作呢？我们一年半以前都没有想到要这样做，现在发生的一切真是太神奇了。谁会猜到呢？这非常有趣。

如芒格所言：「我发现我应该开始为自己、而不是为别人工作」。用人生彩虹本，科学制定人生计划，提升你的人生自由度与幸福感。