# 2020007MediumR09

## 记忆时间

## 目录

20200902The-Top-10-Programming-Blogs-in-2020.md

20200902Advanced-Python-Define-Python-Functions.md

20200903ten-Resources-to-Learn-Vue-in-2020.md

## 20200902The-Top-10-Programming-Blogs-in-2020.md

Programming is an interesting field since it gives us the superpower to control computer systems. It can be used in airplanes, traffic control, robots, self-driving cars, websites, mobile apps, and for a ton of other use cases. Now the main thing is that software engineers have created several programming languages, and each of them is suitable to solve a different problem.

Today, I’m gonna share with you some websites and blogs that write about different programming languages and the best practices when using them. This list is in no particular order — all of them are great reads!

1『很有价值的资源池。』

### 01. The hackr.io Blog

[Hackr.io Blog - Best practices and Insights for Programmers & Designers](https://hackr.io/blog)

hackr.io is basically a website where people recommend programming courses, and the best one ranks to the top. The reason behind mentioning this blog is their team regularly publishes interesting tutorials and informational guides for software developers.

For example, you can learn about mobile and web development frameworks, Java projects, software testing, interview questions, and much more. But remember they write about a completely different topic every time they publish an article. So it might not be the best blog to follow if you’re interested in a specific programming language.

### 02. Better Programming

[Better Programming – Medium](https://medium.com/better-programming)

Better Programming is a Medium publication dedicated to programming. They publish multiple articles every day from multiple authors, all curated and edited to guarantee excellent content and great reads.

They cover a variety of topics and programming languages, with content for both beginners and very advanced readers. It’s a must-have on your daily ingest if you want to develop your programming skills.

Full disclosure, I’m a regular writer at Better Programming, but I was a reader for a long time before I started generating my own content. I was extremely happy when I got the chance the publish my articles with them.

### 03. DEV

[DEV Community](https://dev.to/)

Collaboration plays a key role in developing high-quality software. That’s the sole reason behind the existence of the DEV community. It enables software developers to share their knowledge with the whole world by posting informational articles. I’d personally recommend you regularly visit this website to keep an eye on what’s going on in the development field.

A great thing about DEV is their website code is completely open-source. This means you can easily have a look at the source code that powers this amazing website.

1『在 DEV 上源码都能看到，哈哈。』

### 04. Hacker Noon

[Hacker Noon](https://hackernoon.com/)

Just like DEV, Hacker Noon is also a community-run website. It has more than 7,000 active contributors that write on diverse but relevant topics for software developers. It focuses on things like programming, startups, technology, entrepreneurship, business, marketing, etc.

In my opinion, we developers aren’t familiar enough with the business side of software and technology. So Hacker Noon can be a great platform to learn programming and how to earn money from it.

### 05. Live Code Stream

[Live Code Stream | Articles on Javascript, Python, AI and more...](https://livecodestream.dev/)

This is a blog of my own creation. It’s dedicated to programming and AI and was built to share my development experience with you. You’ll see me writing about artificial intelligence, programming (mostly Python and JavaScript), machine learning, and the best way to use them in projects.

1『作者自己的博客。』

The site is optimized for loading speed and reading comfort, offering a dark mode for those who prefer that.

Actually, unlike many other bloggers, I used a static-site generator called Hugo to generate this website. Its major advantage is speed as compared to a CMS like WordPress. I’ve created a tutorial on static hosting with AWS and user-friendly URLs.

### 06. David Walsh Blog (DWB)

[David Walsh Blog - JavaScript Consultant](https://davidwalsh.name/)

David Walsh is a very popular blogger within the developer community. Basically, he’s a software engineer who works at the tech giant Mozilla. If you’ve ever tried to learn about web development, then you might come across the step-by-step documentation provided by the Mozilla Developer Network (MDN) . David Walsh is the one who mostly enhanced that website.

1『学 web 前端的首选地，哈哈。』

So considering his knowledge and experience in the web development field, you’ll definitely learn a lot from his blog.

### 07. Droids On Roids Blog

[Blog about Mobile & Web App Development – Droids On Roids](https://www.thedroidsonroids.com/blog)

Want to learn mobile-application development? This blog regularly publishes best practices and how-to guides for beginners. It’ll help you understand the importance of creating great user experiences.

They have articles about Android, iOS, Flutter, and many other app-development frameworks or tools. So follow them to stay aware of the latest mobile-development trends.

1『学移动端的首选地。』

### 08. Real Python

[Python Tutorials – Real Python](https://realpython.com/)

Python is no doubt an all-seasons language — meaning you can develop mobile apps, games, websites, embedded applications, and even machine learning projects using Python. As its name suggests, Real Python is a website completely focused on delivering high-quality tutorials and courses on the Python programming language.

These days, Python is also taught as a first programming language in different schools throughout the world. In case you’re also getting started, then I’d highly recommend you to visit this website and follow their step-by-step guides.

### 09. Golang Programs

[Golang Tutorial, Blog, Articles and Examples - golangprograms.com](https://www.golangprograms.com/)

Go is a programming language that was designed by the smart software engineers of Google. Its performance is way better than most high-level programming languages. That’s the reason why programmers love to add Go to their tech stack.

If you’re someone who’s completely new to Go, then this website will help you get started quickly. They have a beginner-friendly tutorial series and references written by professionals. Every now and then, you’ll also see examples and solutions to different problems, which are a great way to learn about the real-world implementation of the Go programming language.

### 10. Stack Abuse

[Stack Abuse](https://stackabuse.com/)

Stack Abuse mainly focuses on topics like Python, JavaScript, Java, and the Unix operating system. It’s managed by Scott Robinson with a team of content writers. They usually publish how-to guides and teach you through example code snippets.

It’ll be a useful resource to learn project-based concepts. But before that, you must have some familiarity with the basics of JavaScript, Python, and Java.

### Conclusion

As a beginner, learning a programming language can become a daunting task. So the main purpose of writing this article is to introduce you to interesting programming blogs. Now, it’s your turn to follow these websites and bring your programming skills to the next level.

## 20200902Advanced-Python-Define-Python-Functions.md

No matter what implementation mechanisms programming languages use, all of them have a reserved seat for functions. Functions are essential parts of any code project because they’re responsible for preparing and processing data and configuring user interface elements. Without exception, Python, while positioned as an object-oriented programming language, depends on functions to perform data-related operations. So, writing good functions is critical to building a resilient code base.

It’s straightforward to define a few simple functions in a small project. With the growth of the project scope, the functions can get far more complicated and the need for more functions grows exponentially. Getting all the functions to work together without any confusion can be a headache, even to experienced programmers. Applying best practices to function declarations becomes more important as the scope of your project grows. In this article, I’d like to talk about best practices for declaring functions — knowledge I have accrued over years of coding.

### 01. General Guidelines

You may be familiar with these general guidelines, but I’d like to discuss them first because they’re high-level, good practices that many programmers don’t appreciate. When developers don’t follow these guidelines, they pay the price — the code is very hard to maintain.

#### 1.1 Explicit and meaningful names

We have to give meaningful names to our functions. As you know, functions are also objects in Python, so when we define a function, we basically create a variable of the function type. So, the variable name (i.e. the name of the function) has to reflect the operation it performs.

1『第一次知道，Python 里函数也是一种「对象」，跟 JS 里的函数一样。』

Although readability has become more emphasized in modern coding, it’s mostly talked about in regards to comments — it’s much less often discussed in relation to code itself. So, if you have to write extensive comments to explain your functions, it’s very likely that your functions don’t have good names. Don’t worry about having a long function name — almost all modern IDEs have excellent auto-completion hints, which will save you from typing the entire long names.

```py
# Too generic, wanting others to guess what it does??
def foo(): pass

# Lack of details, requiring contexts to understand
def do_step1(): pass

# Not following naming conventions, which should be snake style and all lowercase
def GETData(): pass

# A few explicit and meaningful names
def get_account_info(): pass

def generate_sales_report(): pass
```

1-2『每个语言还是按照每个语言推荐的编程规范把，比如 Python 里函数的命令是全小写的蛇形命名。做一张 Python 编程规范的主题卡片。』——已完成

Good naming rules should also apply to the arguments of the function and all local variables within the function. Something else to note is that if your functions are intended to be used within your class or module, you may want to prefix the name with an underscore (e.g., def \_internal\_fun():) to indicate that these functions are for private usages and they’re not public APIs.

#### 1.2 Small and Single Purpose

Your functions should be kept small, so they’re easier to manage. Imagine that you’re building a house (not a mansion). However, the bricks you’re using are one meter cubed. Are they easy to use? Probably not — they’re too large. The same principle applies to functions. The functions are the bricks of your project. If the functions are all enormous in size, your construction won’t progress as smoothly as it could. When they’re small, they’re easier to fit into various places and moved around if the need arises.

It’s also key for your functions to serve single purposes, which can help you keep your functions small. Another benefit of single-purpose functions is that you’ll find it much easier to name such functions. You can simply name your function based on its intended single purpose. The following is how we can refactor our functions to make each of them serve only one purpose each. Another thing to note is that by doing that, you can minimize the comments that you need to write — because all the function names tell the story.

```py
# Embed all operations with one single function
def process_data():
    # a bunch of code to read data
    # a bunch of code to clean the data
    # a bunch of code to generate the report
    pass

# Refactor by create additional smaller functions
def read_data_from_path(filepath):
    return data

def clean_data(data): 
    return cleaned_data

def generate_report(cleaned_data):
    return report

def process_data():
    data = read_data_from_path(filepath="path_to_file.csv")
    cleaned_data = clean_data(data)
    report = generate_report(cleaned_data)
    return report
```

#### 1.3 Don’t reinvent the wheel

You don’t have unlimited energy and time to write functions for every operation you need, so it’s essential to be familiar with common functions in standard libraries. Before you define your own functions, think about whether the particular business need is common — if so, it’s likely that these particular and related needs have already been addressed.

For instance, if you work with data in the CSV format, you can look into the functionalities in the CSV module. Alternatively, the pandas library can handle CSV files gracefully. For another instance, if you want to count elements in a list, you should consider the Counter class in the collections module, which is designed specifically for these operations.

3『

[csv — CSV File Reading and Writing — Python 3.8.5 documentation](https://docs.python.org/3/library/csv.html)

[pandas - Python Data Analysis Library](https://pandas.pydata.org/)

』

### 02. Default Arguments

#### 2.1 Relevant scenarios

When we first define a function, it usually serves one particular purpose. However, when you add more features to your project, you may realize that some closely related functions can be merged. The only difference is that the invocation of the merged function sometimes involves passing another argument or setting slightly different arguments. In this case, you can consider setting a default value to the argument.

The other common scenario is that when you declare a function, you already expect that your function serves multiple purposes, with function calls using differential parameters while some other parameters requiring few variations. You should consider setting a default value to the less varied argument.

#### 2.2 Set default arguments

The benefit of setting default arguments is straightforward — you don’t need to deal with setting unnecessary arguments in most cases. However, the availability of keeping these parameters in your function signature allows you to use your functions more flexibly when you need to. For instance, for the built-in sorted() function, there are several ways to call the function, but in most cases, we just use the basic form: sorted(the\_iterable), which will sort the iterable in the ascending lexicographic order. However, when you want to change the ascending order or the default lexicographic order, we can override the default setting by specifying the reverse and key arguments.

We should apply the same practice to our own function declaration. In terms of what value we should set, the rule of thumb is you should choose the default value that is to be used for most function calls. Because this is an optional argument, you (or the users of your APIs) don’t want to set it in most situations. Consider the following example:

```py
# Set the price to the sale price or clearance sale with has addition discount
def set_regular_sale_price(price, discount):
    price *= discount
    return price


def set_clearance_sale_price(price, discount, additional_discount):
    sale_price = set_sale_price(price, discount)
    return sale_price * additional_discount


# A refactored combined function
def set_sale_price(price, discount, additional_discount=1):
    sale_price = price * discount
    return sale_price * additional_discount
```

#### 2.3 Avoid the pitfalls of mutable default arguments

There is a catch for setting the default argument. If your argument is a mutable object, it’s important that you don’t set it using the default constructor — because functions are objects in Python and they’re created when they’re defined. The side effect is that the default argument is evaluated at the time of function declaration, so a default mutable object is created and becomes part of the function. Whenever you call the function using the default object, you’re essentially accessing the same mutable object associated with the function, although your intention may be having the function to create a brand new object for you. The following code snippet shows you the unwanted side effect of setting a default mutable argument:

```py
>>> def add_item_to_cart(new_item, shopper_name, existing_items=[]):
...     existing_items.append(new_item)
...     print(f"{shopper_name}'s cart has {existing_items}")
...     return existing_items
... 
... 
... shopping_list_wife = add_item_to_cart("Dress", "Jennifer")
... shopping_list_husband = add_item_to_cart("Soccer", "David")
... 
Jennifer's cart has ['Dress']
David's cart has ['Dress', 'Soccer']
```

As shown above, although we intended to create two distinct shopping lists, the second function call still accessed the same underlying object, which resulted in the Soccer item added to the same list object. To solve the problem, we should use the following implementation. Specifically, you should use None as the default value for a mutable argument:

```py
def add_item_to_cart(new_item, shopper_name, existing_items=None):
    if existing_items is None:
        existing_items = list()
    existing_items.append(new_item)
    print(f"{shopper_name}'s cart has {existing_items}")
    return existing_items
```

1『

自己的实现：

```py
def add_item_to_cart(new_item, shopper_name, existing_items=[]):
    existing_items.append(new_item)
    print(f"{shopper_name}'s cart has {existing_items}'")
    return existing_items

def add_item_to_cart_refactor(new_item, shopper_name, existing_items=None):
    if existing_items is None:
        existing_items = list()
    existing_items.append(new_item)
    print(f"{shopper_name}'s cart has {existing_items}'")
    return existing_items

if __name__ == "__main__":
    add_item_to_cart_refactor('Dress', 'Jennifer')
    add_item_to_cart_refactor('Soccer', 'David')
```

』

### 03. Consider Returning Multiple Values

#### 3.1 Multiple values in a tuple

When your function performs complicated operations, the chances are that these operations can generate two or more objects, all of which are needed for your subsequent data processing. Theoretically, it’s possible that you can create a class to wrap these objects such that your function can return the class instance as its output. However, it’s possible in Python that a function can return multiple values. More precisely speaking, these multiple values are returned as a tuple object. The following code shows you a trivial example:

```py
>>> from statistics import mean, stdev
... 
... def evaluate_test_result(scores):
...     scores_mean = mean(scores)
...     scores_std = stdev(scores)
...     return scores_mean, scores_std
... 
... evaluation_result = evaluate_test_result([1, 1, 1, 2, 2, 2, 6, 6, 6])
... print(f"Evaluation Result ({type(evaluation_result)}): {evaluation_result}")
... 
Evaluation Result (<class 'tuple'>): (3, 2.29128784747792)
```

As shown above, the returned values are simply separated by a comma, which essentially creates a tuple object, as checked by the type() function.

1『大赞，原来 Python 能直接返回多个值，以元组的类型返回，试了下，返回 3 个数值的话，返回的是一个含有 3 个元素的元组。但目前还没遇到过该使用场景，它解决了什么问题？（2020-09-03）』

#### 3.2 But no more than three

One thing to note is that although Python functions can return multiple values, you should not abuse this feature. One value (when a function doesn’t explicitly return anything, it actually returns None implicitly) is best — because everything is straightforward and most users usually expect a function to return only one value. In some cases, returning two values is fine, returning three values is probably still OK, but please don’t ever return four values. It can create a lot of confusion for the users over which are which. If it happens, this is a good indication that you should refactor your functions — your functions probably serve multiple purposes and you should create smaller ones with more dedicated responsibilities.

### 04. Use Try…Except

When you define functions as public APIs, you can’t always assume that the users set the desired parameters to the functions. Even if we use the functions ourselves, it’s possible that some parameters are created out of our control and they’re incompatible with our functions. In these cases, what should we do in our function declaration?

The first consideration is to use the try…except statement, which is the typical exception handling technique. You embed the code that can possibly go wrong (i.e., raise certain exceptions) in the try clause and the possible exceptions are handled in the except clause.

Let’s consider the following scenario. Suppose that the particular business need is that your function takes a file path and if the file exists and is read successfully, your function does some data processing operations with the file and returns the result, otherwise returns -1. There are multiple ways to implement this need. The code below shows you a possible solution:

```py
def get_data_from_file(filepath):
    try:
        with open(filepath) as file:
            computed_value = process_data(file)
    except Exception:
        return -1
    else:
        return computed_value

def process_data(file):
    # process the data
    return computed_value
```

In other words, if you expect that users of your functions can set some arguments that result in exceptions in your code, you can define functions that handle these possible exceptions. However, this should be communicated with the users clearly, unless it’s part of the feature as shown in the example (return -1 when the file can’t be read).

### 05. Consider Argument Validation

The previous function using the try…except statement is sometimes referred to as the EAFP (Easier to Ask Forgiveness than Permission) coding style. There is another coding style called LBYL (Look Before You Leap), which stresses the sanity check before running particular code blocks.

Following the previous example, in terms of applying LBYL to function declaration, the other consideration is to validate your function’s arguments. One common use case for argument validation is to check whether the argument is of the right data type. As we all know, Python is a dynamically-typed language, which doesn’t enforce type checking. For instance, your function’s arguments should be integers or floating-point numbers. However, calling the function by setting strings — the invocation itself — won’t prompt any error messages until the function is executed.

The following code shows how to validate the arguments before running the code:

```py
# Check type before running the code
def add_numbers(a, b):
    if not(isinstance(a, (float, int)) and isinstance(b, (float, int))):
        raise TypeError("Numbers are required.")
    return a + b
```

#### Discussion: EAFP vs. LBYL

It should be noted that both EAFP and LBYL can be applied to more than just dealing with function arguments. They can be applied anywhere in your functions. Although EAFP is a preferred coding style in the Python world, depending on your use case, you should also consider using LBYL which can provide more user-friendly function-specific error messages than the generic built-in error messages you get with the EAFP style.

### 06. Consider Lambda Functions As Alternatives

#### 6.1 Functions as parameters of other functions

Some functions can take another function (or are callable, in general terms) to perform particular operations. For instance, the sorted() function has the key argument that allows us to define more custom sorting behaviors. The following code snippet shows you a use case:

```py
>>> # A list of dictionary objects for sorting
>>> grades = [{'name': 'John', 'score': 97},
...           {'name': 'David', 'score': 96},
...           {'name': 'Jennifer', 'score': 98},
...           {'name': 'Ashley', 'score': 94}]
>>> def sorting_grade(x):
...     return x['score']
... 
>>> sorted(grades, key=sorting_grade)
[{'name': 'Ashley', 'score': 94}, {'name': 'David', 'score': 96}, {'name': 'John', 'score': 97}, {'name': 'Jennifer', 'score': 98}]
```

#### 6.2 Lambda functions as alternatives

Notably, the sorting_grade function was used just once and it’s a simple function — in which case, we can consider using a lambda function.

If you’re not familiar with the lambda function, here’s a brief description. A lambda function is an anonymous function declared using the lambda keyword. It takes zero to more arguments and has one expression for applicable operations with the form: lambda arguments: expression. The following code shows you how we can use a lambda function in the sorted() function, which looks a little cleaner than the solution above:

```py
>>> sorted(grades, key=lambda x: x['score'])
[{'name': 'Ashley', 'score': 94}, {'name': 'David', 'score': 96}, {'name': 'John', 'score': 97}, {'name': 'Jennifer', 'score': 98}]
```

Another common use-case that’s relevant to many data scientists is the use of lambda functions when they work with the pandas library. The following code is a trivial example how a lambda function assists data manipulation using the map() function, which operates each item in a pandas Series object:

```py
>>> import pandas as pd
>>> interest_rates = pd.Series([0.023, 0.025, 0.037])
>>> interest_rates.map(lambda x: f"{x:.2%}")
0    2.30%
1    2.50%
2    3.70%
dtype: object
```

1『自己经常用 pandas 干类似上面的操作，只是大多数用的 apply 回调函数。』

### 07. Consider Decorators

#### 7.1 Decorators

Decorators are functions that modify the behavior of other functions without affecting their core functionalities. In other words, they provide modifications to the decorated functions at the cosmetic level. If you don’t know too much about decorators, please feel free to refer to my earlier articles (1, 2, and 3). Here’s a trivial example of how decorators work in Python.

3『

[How to Write Python Decorators That Take Parameters | by Yong Cui, Ph.D. | Better Programming | Medium](https://medium.com/better-programming/how-to-write-python-decorators-that-take-parameters-b5a07d7fe393)

[Why You Should Wrap Decorators in Python | by Yong Cui, Ph.D. | Jul, 2020 | Towards Data Science](https://towardsdatascience.com/why-you-should-wrap-decorators-in-python-5ac3676835f9)

[Three Decorators Commonly Used in Python Custom Classes | by Yong Cui, Ph.D. | The Startup | Medium](https://medium.com/swlh/three-decorators-commonly-used-in-python-custom-classes-acc34a145dcf)

』

```py
>>> # Define a decorator function
... def echo_wrapper(func):
...     def wrapper(*args, **kwargs):
...         func(*args, **kwargs)
...         func(*args, **kwargs)
...     return wrapper
... 
>>> # Define a function that is decorated by echo_wrapper
... @echo_wrapper
... def say_hello():
...     print('Hello!')
... 
>>> # Call the decorated function
... say_hello()
Hello!
Hello!
```

As shown, the decorator function simply runs the decorated function twice. To use the decorator, we simply place the decorator function name above the decorated function with an @ prefix. As you can tell, the decorated function did get called twice.

1『上面的知识点没看懂。（2020-09-03）』

#### 7.2 Use decorators in function declarations

For instance, one useful decorator is the property decorator that you can use in your custom class. The following code shows you how it works. In essence, the @property decorator converts an instance method to make it behave like a regular attribute, which allows the access of using the dot notation.

```py
>>> class Product:
...     def __init__(self, item_id, price):
...         self.item_id = item_id
...         self.price = price
... 
...     @property
...     def employee_price(self):
...         return self.price * 0.9
... 
>>> product = Product(12345, 100)
>>> product.employee_price
90.0
```

Another trivial use case of decorators is the time logging decorator, which can be particularly handy when the efficiency of your functions is of concern. The following code shows you such a usage:

```py
>>> from time import time
... 
... # Create the decorator function
... def logging_time(func):
...     def logged(*args, **kwargs):
...         start_time = time()
...         func(*args, **kwargs)
...         elapsed_time = time() - start_time
...         print(f"{func.__name__} time elapsed: {elapsed_time:.5f}")
... 
...     return logged
... 
... @logging_time
... def calculate_integer_sum(n):
...     return sum(range(n))
... 
... @logging_time
... def calculate_integer_square_sum(n):
...     return sum(x*x for x in range(n))
... 
>>> calculate_integer_sum(10000)
calculate_integer_sum time elapsed: 0.00027
>>> calculate_integer_square_sum(10000)
calculate_integer_square_sum time elapsed: 0.00110
```

### 08. Use \*args and \*\*kwargs — But Parsimoniously

In the previous section, you saw the use of \*args and \*\*kwargs in defining our decorator function, the use of which allows the decorator function to decorate any functions. In essence, we use \*args to capture all (or an undetermined number of, to be more general) position arguments while \*\*kwargs to capture all (or an undetermined number of, to be more general) keyword arguments. Specifically, position arguments are based on the positions of the arguments that are passed in the function call, while keyword arguments are based on setting parameters to specifically named function arguments.

If you’re unfamiliar with these terminologies, here’s a quick peek to the signature of the built-in sorted() function: sorted(iterable, *, key=None, reverse=False). The iterable argument is a position argument, while the key and reverse arguments are keyword arguments.

The major benefit of using \*args and \*\*kwargs is to make your function declaration looks clean, or less noisy for the same matter. The following example shows you a legitimate use of \*arg in function declaration, which allows your function to accept any number of position arguments.

```py
>>> # Define a function that accepts undetermined position arguments
>>> def stringify(*args):
...     return [str(x) for x in args]
... 
>>> stringify(2, False, None)
['2', 'False', 'None']
```

The following code shows you a legitimate use of \*\*kwargs in function declaration. Similarly, the function with \*\*kwargs allows the users to set any number of keyword arguments, to make your function more flexible.

```py
>>> # Define a function that accepts undetermined keyword arguments
... def generate_score_reports(name, **kwargs):
...     print(f"***** Report for {name} *****")
...     for key, value in kwargs.items():
...         print(f"### {key}: {value}")
...     print("***** Report End *****\n")
... 
... scores = {"John": {"math": 99, "phys": 97},
...           "Jan": {"math": 94, "bio": 98}}
... 
>>> for name, scores in scores.items():
...     generate_score_reports(name, **scores)
... 
***** Report for John *****
### math: 99
### phys: 97
***** Report End *****

***** Report for Jan *****
### math: 94
### bio: 98
***** Report End *****
```

However, in most cases, you don’t need to use \*args or \*\*kwargs. Although it can make your declaration a bit cleaner, it hides the function’s signature. In other words, the users of your functions have to figure out exactly what parameters your functions take. So my advice is to avoid using them if you don’t have to. For instance, can I use a dictionary argument to replace the \*\*kwargs? Similarly, can I use a list or tuple object to replace \*args? In most cases, these alternatives should work without any problems.

1『确实，个人也觉得用列表或字典传参进去就行了。』

### 09. Type Annotation for Arguments

As mentioned previously, Python is a dynamically-typed programming language as well as an interpreted language, the implication of which is that Python doesn’t check code validity, including type compatibility, during coding time. Until your code actually executes, will type incompatibility with your function (e.g., send a string to a function when an integer is expected) emerge.

For these reasons, Python doesn’t enforce the declaration of the type of input and output arguments. In other words, when you create your functions, you don’t need to specify what types of parameters they should have. However, it has become possible to do that in recent Python releases. The major benefit of having type annotation is that some IDEs (e.g., PyCharm or Visual Studio Code) could use the annotations to check the type compatibility for you, so that when you or other users use your functions you can get proper hints.

Another related benefit is that if the IDEs know the type of parameter, it can give proper auto-completion suggestions to help you code faster. Certainly, when you write docstrings for your functions, these type annotations will also be informative to the end developers of your code.

### 10. Responsible Documentation

I equate good documentation with responsible documentation. If your functions are for private uses, you don’t have to write very thorough documentation — you can make the assumption that your code tells the story clearly. If anywhere requires some clarification, you can write a very brief comment that can serve as a reminder for yourself or other readers when your code is revisited. Here, the discussion of responsible documentation is more concerned with the docstrings of your function as public APIs. The following aspects should be included:

1. A brief summary of the intended operation of your function. This should be very concise. In most cases, the summary shouldn’t be more than one sentence.

2. Input arguments: Type and explanation. You need to specify what type of your input arguments should be and what they can do by setting particular options.

3. Return Value: Type and explanation. Just as with input arguments, you need to specify the output of your function. If it doesn’t return anything, you can optionally specify None as the return value.

### Conclusions

If you’re experienced with coding, you’ll find out that most of your time is spent on writing and refactoring functions. After all, your data usually doesn’t change too much itself— it’s the functions that process and manipulate your data. If you think of data as the trunk of your body, functions are the arms and legs that move you around. So, we have to write good functions to make our programs agile.

I hope that this article has conveyed some useful information that you can use in your coding.

## 20200903ten-Resources-to-Learn-Vue-in-2020.md

After a few years of working with React, I was getting more and more curious about Vue and its growing ecosystem. I’m thrilled that I now get to dedicate my whole time to it, having recently joined a company that uses Vue for all its front end.

What a blast! The learning curve is nothing compared to React’s. It just feels like everything falls into place, and in the end, I find it so much easier than with React to keep the app clean, readable, maintainable, and scalable. This is my very personal opinion, of course, and I still find lots of advantages to using React. However, the pleasure that has come from working with Vue over the last few weeks has, to my own surprise, brought me to a no-going-back point and I’ll be writing a lot more on Vue from now on.

While it’s true that React has the biggest community at the moment, it also comes with a huge opportunity for us developers to play a role in the Vue ecosystem. That will have a great impact since I’m personally convinced that Vue will take up a much larger market share in the coming years.

Feel excited? I know I am, and as a start, here are ten great resources to learn Vue.js (without forgetting their very high-quality official documentation) so that you can get on that awesome and promising journey too!

### 01. Vue School

[Learn Vue.js from core-team members and industry experts at Vue School](https://vueschool.io/)

The Vue School platform is fully dedicated to Vue and is one of the most exhaustive and qualitative I found. Courses start from a very beginner level and bring you all the way to being a hirable Vue.js developer. New courses are added regularly, which helps to stay up to date with the latest additions to the ecosystem. You might have heard of Vue 3, which is going to be huge. Also, a Vue 3 Master Class is a「work in progress」on Vue School.

After discovering the basic concepts with the beginner courses, the Vue.js Master Class will get you to the next level. This course will teach you everything there is to know about Vue while building a production-ready forum application using the Vue-CLI, single-file components, Vue router, managing state with Vuex, building Vue plug-ins, adding third-party authentication and a real-time database usage with Firebase (if you’ve checked my other articles, you know my love for Firebase), and a lot more. It offers all this while teaching you the best practices regarding the architecture of a clean, scalable, and maintainable Vue application.

Cost: Some courses are free and full access is \$25/mo.

### 02. Vue Mastery

If you knew Code School back in the day, you’ll recognize its former founder Gregg Pollack. He’s backed on Vue Mastery by several Vue.js core team members and other highly skilled developers. On top of that, what I love most about Vue Mastery is that Gregg and its team regularly invite Evan You (creator of Vue.js) for in-depth talks about the heart of Vue’s building, how it works, and where it’s heading. It brings invaluable insight into Vue to master it to its core.

It also starts at the very basics and moves towards more advanced topics at a pace that I found really well balanced.

Cost: Some courses are free and full access is \$19/mo.

### 03. Udemy: Vue JS — The Complete Guide (incl. Vue Router & Vuex)

[Develop with VueJS 2 (Complete Vue.js Router and Vuex Course) | Udemy](https://www.udemy.com/course/vuejs-2-the-complete-guide/)

If you’re more of a Udemy learner, there’s a Udemy course by one of my favorite instructors, Maximilian Schwarzmüller. This is a project-based course covering every topic from the very basics. I personally didn’t try it, but I’ve followed several courses by Maximilian and always enjoyed the quality of his courses. Also, it has a 4.7/5 score out of almost 40K grades, making it the top Vue.js course on Udemy right now. If you’ve followed it, don’t hesitate to share your thoughts on it in the comments.

Cost: As with any course on Udemy, you can get it for \$10 or less when it’s on sale.

### 04. Scrimba: Learn Vue.js for Free

[Learn to Code with Interactive Tutorials | Scrimba](https://scrimba.com/)

Scrimba is a learning platform that I just recently discovered. They cover a wide range of topics, so I’m definitely going to try some of them. They have a pay-per-course pricing model kind of like Udemy. Some of their courses are free, like this one on Vue.

What’s interesting about this one is that they use an interactive online editor. So you’re watching a video course, but at any point, you can jump into the code on the screen to complete an exercise, which makes it very hands-on and engaging.

This free Vue course doesn’t cover very much, though, so it’s more of a way for you to see if you like Scrimba as a learning platform. If so, you can subscribe for \$19/month and follow their Vue Bootcamp, which is much more thorough.

Cost: Freemium at $19/month.

### 05. Scotch.io: Getting Started with Vue.js

[Top Shelf Web Development Training ― Scotch.io](https://scotch.io/)

Scotch.io is a great learning platform mainly for front-end developers, but it also covers some back-end/APIs topics. They have a new course on building an API with Deno, for example, that I’ll be taking a look at very soon. Their Getting Started with Vue.js course is really for beginners, so it’s a good place to start. What I like about their teaching method in this course is that they show you how a feature would look in vanilla JS and then built with Vue.

It only handles the basics, though, so you’ll need to move forward with their intermediate course where you’ll learn about routing and managing the state with Vuex while building an online store. And then you’ll need to move to more complete platforms like Vue Mastery or Vue School.

Cost: Since it’s been acquired by DigitalOcean, all courses on Scotch are completely free.

### 06. Alligator.io — Vue.js Section

[Posts About Vue.js ← Alligator.io](https://alligator.io/vuejs/)

Alligator is a fully free blogging platform with an impressive amount of posts on anything front end. Their section on Vue.js is so wide that you can scroll to the very bottom of it, start from a Hello World, and walk your way up to more complex concepts like lazy-loading, handling online/offline, using third-party tools (Google Analytics, Firebase, Google Maps, Socket.io, etc.), or using Apollo and GraphQL.

Lots of their articles are initially posted on DigitalOcean’s blog, so don’t be surprised if some links (especially the older ones) redirect to it.

Cost: Free

### 07. freeCodeCamp: Learn Vue.js — Full Course for Beginners

[Learn Vue.js - Full Course for Beginners](https://www.freecodecamp.org/news/vue-js-full-course/)

As we could expect from one of the most complete learning platforms in our industry, freeCodeCamp offers a free three-hour video course on Vue.js.

In my opinion, this course is way less engaging than others from this list. Regardless, it’s very thorough, and if you want to quickly cover as many Vue concepts as possible, this one goes through all you need to know to get started on a Vue project in under three hours.

Cost: Free

### 08. Medium: How to Build Sudoku in Vue.js

[How To Build Sudoku in Vue.js. How to code this simple game from A to… | by Francesco Bonizzi | Better Programming | Medium](https://medium.com/better-programming/how-to-build-sudoku-in-vue-js-f97509b523ed)

I love posts that are dedicated to building a fun project from scratch. There’s no better way to learn than by doing, and I’m very much willing to write some similar project-based articles in the future. If you have requests for projects you’d like to learn how to build with Vue or React, don’t hesitate to share in the comments!

By reading this article by Francesco Bonizzi, you’ll be able to build a fully working Sudoku game using Vue. How cool is that?

Cost: Free

### 09. freeCodeCamp: How to Build a Memory Card Game With Vue.js

[How to Build a Memory Card Game with Vue.js](https://www.freecodecamp.org/news/how-to-build-a-memory-card-game-with-vuejs/)

Moving along on the learning-by-building path, freeCodeCamp has a complete guide to building a memory card game by Tushar Gugnani.

Cost: Free

### 10. Hackernoon: How to Build a Portfolio Site Using Vue and Cosmic JS

[How to Build a Portfolio Site Using Vue and Cosmic JS | Hacker Noon](https://hackernoon.com/how-to-build-portfolio-site-using-vue-and-cosmic-js-5832bce7e7dc)

Once you’ve developed all the skills you need to get hired as a Vue.js developer, you’ll need a portfolio to let companies and recruiters know about your great new Vue.js acumen. This final tutorial will help you do just that: Build your own portfolio site using Vue.js — and discover the headless CMS Cosmic JS in the process.

Cost: Free
