# 0205. Cybernetworks and the Global Village: The Rise of Social Capital

原书第十二章

One recent controversy in the study of social capital has been an issue raised by Putnam (1993, 1995a, 1995b): whether social capital has been on the decline in the United States for the past three or four decades.

Putnam argues that there should be a positive association between social capital and political participation, and he measures social capital in terms of participation rates in social associations or secondary/tertiary associations such as PTAs, Red Cross associations, unions, church-affiliated groups, sports groups, and bowling leagues. Political participation is indicated by voting, writing to Congress, participating in rallies and political meetings, and so on. Putnam has observed that both participation rates have declined in the United States over the past thirty years or so. This has led him to conclude that social capital or civic engagement has been on the decline, and this decline might be responsible for a decline in democratic and political participation. Further, he suggests that the culprit may be the rise of television viewing. As television has gained popularity, the younger generations of Americans are no longer interested in participating in civil associations. Indeed, he suggests, even when they go bowling, they may bowl as individuals rather than as groups or leagues.

Putnam’s thesis and research have been challenged from a variety of theoretical and methodological perspectives. These challenges fault Putnam’s work primarily on two grounds. First, he committed errors in measuring social capital. For example, it has been pointed out that he erred in the analyses of the General Social Survey data (Greeley 1997a); he should have used「amount of time dedicated to voluntary work」(Greeley 1997b, 1997c; Newton 1997) rather than mere membership in certain organizations; he excluded certain types of associations (especially organizations emerging in contemporary America [Schudson 1996; Greeley 1997a, 1997b, 1997c; Minkoff 1997; Newton 1997]); and membership in an association is not the same as civic-mindedness or civic energy (Schudson 1996). Second, assuming that his measurements of social capital were acceptable, Putnam blamed the wrong culprit; other factors have been more critical than television viewing (Schudson 1996; Skocpol 1996). 1

Whether social capital is rising or declining largely depends on how it is defined and measured (Greeley 1997b; Portes 1998; Lin 1999a). In addition, its significance lies in the consequences selected for analysis.

When it is measured using multiple concepts such as memberships, norms, and trust, there is a danger of confusing a causal proposition (e.g., networks promote trust or vice versa) with multiple indicators of the same thing (networks, trust, and norms all measure social capital).

When it is applied to a collectivity as well as to individuals, there is also a danger of the ecological fallacy (e.g., conclusions drawn from one level are assumed to be valid for another).

Following the theory proposed in this volume, I argue that social capital should be measured as embedded resources in social networks.

This definition ensures consistency in the measurement and in theory as originally conceived (Bourdieu, Coleman, Lin). It also demands and allows macrophenomena to be examined for the processes and mechanisms by which social capital, thus defined and measured, is invested and mobilized to achieve certain goals at the community or societal level.

From this perspective, then, the debate on whether social capital has been declining or rising in the United States or any society remains to be demonstrated and verified, as none of the studies carried out so far clearly employ the notion that social capital is reflected in the investment and mobilization of embedded resources in social networks. Membership in associations or social trust may or may not be adequate surrogate measures of social capital; their linkage or association with social capital must be clearly demonstrated before any meaningful debate can proceed.

By focusing the definition and measurement of social capital on embedded resources in networks, I will argue in this chapter that there is clear evidence that social capital has been on the ascent in the past decade – in the form of networks in cyberspace (Lin 1999a). Further, this ascent has consequences beyond community or national boundaries. The 1 There is substantial literature blaming Putnam for using the wrong dependent variable (e.g., importance of good government: Skocpol 1996; the importance of political organizations: Valelly 1996; the importance of national community: Brinkley 1996; the importance of inequality in political participation: Verba, Schlozman, and Brady 1995, 1997; the importance of national elites: Heying 1997; the importance of political institutions: Berman 1997; the importance of institutional incentives: Kenworthy 1997; the importance of culture: Wood 1997). This literature does not address issues directly related to social capital.

hypotheses advanced here are two: (1) social capital in the form of cybernetworks is clearly on the rise in many parts of the world, and (2) the rise of cybernetworks transcends national or local community boundaries; therefore, its consequences (both positive and negative) must be assessed in the global context. I begin with a broad survey of the emergence of cybernetworks and the time- and space-transcending social capital they offer.

最近，普特南（Putnam, 1993, 1995a, 1995b）在社会资本研究中挑起一场争论：在过去三四十年内，美国的社会资本是否在下降。普特南认为，社会资本与政治参与之间存在着正向的关联，他使用社团或第二类 / 第三类社团 一一 如家长-教师协会（PTA）、红十字协会、工会、与教会有关的团体、体育运动小组、保龄球联合会 —— 的参与率来测量社会资本。政治参与通过投票、给国会写信、参加集会和政治会议等形式测量。普特南发现，美国公民的这两种参与率在过去的 30 年里都是下降的。他由此得出结论，社会资本或公民参与在下降，这可能是由民主和政治参与的下降引起的。此外，他指出这可能要归咎于人们收看电视的增多。因为电视的流行，美国的年轻一代已经不再对公民参与感兴趣。他还提出，即使他们去打保龄球，也是独来独往而不是结伴而行。

普特南的观点和研究已经受到了不同的理论与方法论视角的挑战。这些挑战主要从两个方面置疑普特南的研究。

第一，他在测量社会资本上犯了错误。例如，在分析一般性社会调査数据中出现的错误（Greeley, 1997a）；他应该使用「投入在志愿性工作中的时间数量」（Greeley, 1997, 1997c; Newton, 1997），而不能只用属于某个组织的成员身份；他排除了某些类型的社团，特别是美国当代正在出现的组织（Schudson 1996; Greeley 1997a, 1997b, 1997c; Minkoff 1997; Newton 1997）；属于某一社团的成员身份不同于热心于公民事务（Schudson, 1996）。

第二，即使普特南对社会资本的测量是可以接受的，他对社会资本下降的归因也是错误的，其他因素比收看电视更重要（Schudson 1996; Skocpol 1996）。[1]

社会资本是上升还是下降，主要取决于如何定义和测量（Greeley 1997b; Portes 1998; Lin 1999a）。此外，还在于选择哪部分结果来分析。如果使用多重概念 一一 如成员身份、规范和信任 一一 来测量，就存在着将同一事物的多个方面（网络、信任和规范都是对社会资本的测量）混淆为因果命题的危险（例如，网络促进了信任或者信任促进了网络的发展）。如果将适用于集体的原理套在个体身上，就会出现生态谬误（ecological fallacy）（从某一个层次上得出的结论被运用到其他层次）。

根据我前面提出的理论，社会资本应该通过嵌入在社会网络中的资源来测量。这个定义可以确保测量与理论构想的一致性（Bourdieu, Coleman, Lin）。这样定义也便于通过一系列的过程与机制来考察宏观现象，社会资本就是这样的机制，它是为了实现某些社区或社会层次上的目标而被投资和动员的。如果从这个视角出发，那么关于美国或者任何其他社会中的社会资本是上升还是下降的争论就有待于证实，因为迄今为止还没有研究明确地使用这个定义社会资本反映在对嵌入在社会网络中的资源的投资和动员上。属于某一社团的成员身份或者社会信任，能够、也可能不能够代表社会资本。在进行任何有意义的争论之前，我们必须先搞清楚它们与社会资本之间的联系。

根据我对社会资本的定义与测量标准 一一 嵌入在网络中的资源，我认为有明显的证据证明，社会资本在过去的 10 年内以电子网络空间的形式在不断地上升（Lin, 1999a）。此外，这种上升已经超越了社区或国家的边界。我的假设有两点：1）以电子网络形式出现的社会资本在世界各地都有明显的上升；2）电子网络的兴起跨越了国家或地方社区的边界，因此，必须把它的影响（积极的与消极的）放在全球的背景下考虑。我从电子网络及其所产生的超越时空的社会资本的出现开始谈起。

`*` the General Social Survey data，它是 National Opinion Research Center [NORC] 所进行的综合性个人访谈调，其目的是为社会科学研究提供及时的、高质量的、可用于科学研究的数据。—— 中译注

[1] 有很多文献批评普特南使用了错误的因变量（例如，好政府的重要性：Skocpol, 1996；政治组织的重要性：Valelly, 1996；国家社区的重要性：Brinkley, 1996；政治参与中的不平等的重要性：Verba, Schlozman, and Brady, 1995, 1997；国家精英的重要性：Heying, 1997；政治制度的重要性：Berman, 1997；制度激励的重要性：Kenworthy, 1997；文化的重要性：Wood, 1997）。这些文献并没有处理与社会资本直接相关的问题。

## 5.1 The Internet and Cybernetworks: Emerging Social Capital

Cybernetworks are defined as the social networks in cyberspace, and specifically on the Internet. 2 These networks are constructed by individuals and groups of individuals – through e-mail, chat rooms, news groups, and clubs (Jones 1997b; Smith and Kollock 1999) – as well as by informal and formal (e.g., economic, political, religious, media) organizations for the purpose of exchanges, including resource transactions and relations reinforcement. Cybernetworks have become a major avenue of communication globally since the early 1990s; an overview of their extent and scope is informative here.

Since late the 1970s and early 1980s, personal computers (PCs) have penetrated workplaces and homes around the globe. Their presence and pervasiveness have overtaken many other communication commodities in North America, Europe, and East Asian countries. In 1997, U.S. consumers bought more computers than automobiles, according to Steven Landefeld, director of the Bureau of Economic Analysis ( USA Today , March 17, 1999). Worldwide PC sales has overtaken television sales in 2000, according to Paul Otellini of the Intel Architecture Business Group (Intel Developer Forum, February 25, 1999). In fact, PC sales already outnumbered sales of TV sets in 1998 in Australia, Canada, Denmark, and Korea. In 1999, 50 percent of U.S. households had computers, and 33 percent were online (Metcalfe 1999).

E-commerce has become big business (Irving 1995, 1998, 1999). In 1998, online shopping orders totaled `$13` billion (with an average order amount of `$55`), and it was projected to reach `$30` to `$40` billion in 1999

(the Boston Consulting Group, as quoted in PC Magazine , March 9, 1999, p. 9). The greatest growth is expected in travel (88 percent in 1999 over 1998), PC hardware (46 percent), books (75 percent), groceries (137 percent), music (108 percent), and videos (109 percent) (Jupiter Communication, as quoted in PC Magazine , March 9, 1999, p. 10). It 2 A portion of this section is taken from Lin (1999a).

has been estimated that 24 million U.S. adults plan to buy gifts online in 1999, or almost quadruple the 7.8 million who said they bought gifts online in 1998; online holiday shopping alone in 1999 could exceed `$13`

billion (International Communications Research, as quoted in PC Week , March 1, 1999, p. 6). During 1999, Internet commerce, which is growing thirty times faster than most world economies, will reach `$68` billion (Metcalfe 1999, quoting International Data Corp.). By the year 2002, the projection is that online shopping will account for `$32` billion in convenience items such as books and flowers, `$56` billion in researched purchases like travel and computers, and `$19` billion in replenishment goods such as groceries (Forrester Research Inc., as quoted in PC Week , January 4, 1999, p. 25). Another projection suggests that 40 percent of Web users will be online buyers by 2002, resulting in `$400` billion in e-commerce transactions (International Data Corporation, as quoted in ZDNet Radar, Jesse Berst,「Technology of Tomorrow,」January 6, 1999). In the first half of 1998, one out of every five retail stock trades occurred online. There are now an estimated 4.3 million people shopping for stocks and funds online, and online trading is expected to reach 31 percent of the total U.S. investment market by 2003 (Wilson 1999, quoting Piper Jaffray, PC Computing , March 1999, p. 14).

On March 16, 1999, the U.S. Commerce Department scrapped a sixty-year-old industry classification system that had little relevance to an information-based economy ( USA Today , March 17, 1999, p. A1). For example, computers had not even been an industry category; they were grouped with adding machines. A new system was installed that better reflected the new categories created by the information revolution. The system is also designed to be similar to those in Mexico and Canada as trade with those countries continues to grow ( USA Today , March 17, 1999, p. A1). Further, the Commerce Department will begin publishing figures that show the impact of online shopping on retail activity, a key indicator of the nation’s economic health. Until now, the Commerce Department has lumped online shopping figures together with catalogue sales in its overall retail sales numbers. New figures that break out Internet sales as a separate entity will be available by the middle of 2000 for 1998 and 1999 ( Info World , February 15, 1999, p. 71).

Use of the Internet for communications and networking has been more recent but even more phenomenal in growth than PCs themselves. Since the invention of the hypertext technique by Tim Berners-Lee in the 1980s at CERN (the European Particle Physics Laboratory in Geneva, Switzerland) and the introduction of the World Wide Web to the Internet in the summer of 1991, Internet growth in the past decade has been nothing short of revolutionary. In 1995, 14.1 million of 32 million U.S. households had modems, and by January 1999, 37.7 million of 50 million U.S.

households had modems ( USA Today , March 17, 1999, p. 9D). Worldwide, there were 68.7 million Web users in 1997 and 97.3 million in 1998, and the projection is that the number of Web users will exceed 300 million by 2001 (World Trade Organization estimate, March 12, 1998). Two-thirds of the people who will be online by 2002 were not online in early 1999 (Metcalfe 1999, quoting International Data Corp.).

More than 45 million PC users in the United States accessed the Internet regularly in early 1998, a 43 percent increase in the first quarter of 1998 versus the first quarter of 1997. Nearly 49 percent of all U.S. households had at least one PC ( ZD Market Intelligence , January, 1999). In 1999, for the first time, most users – 51 percent – lived outside the United States (Metcalfe 1999, quoting International Data Corp.). The number of Internet users in China surged to 1.5 million in 1998 from 600,000

in 1997 (Xinhua News Agency, January 15, 1999). There were report-edly 4 million Internet users in China in 1999. U.S. Internet guru Nicholas Negroponte predicted in January 1999 that the number of Internet users in China would balloon to 10 million by the year 2000

(Reuters, January 15, 1999).

Female participation on the Internet has also increased dramatically.

In January 1996, only 18 percent of Net users aged eighteen or above were female; by January 1999, fully 50 percent of the users were female ( USA Today , March 17, 1999, p. 9D). By the end of the year, it was expected that women will become the majority of users on the Internet (Metcalfe 1999, quoting International Data Corp.). In 1997, more e-mail was sent than letters via the post office for the first time.

PC experts have announced, to no one’s surprise, that the Internet is changing everything. Michael J. Miller, editor-in-chief of PC Magazine, wrote in February 1999 that the Internet changes「the ways we com-municate, get information, entertain ourselves, and run our businesses」

( PC Magazine , February 2, 1999, p. 4). In January 1999, Paul Somerson stated the same thing in PC Computing . It is practically impossible to get a credible estimate of how many discussion groups, forums, and clubs of multiple types have been formed and are continually being formed. What is the implication of cyberspace and cybernetwork growth for the studies of social networks and social capital? The short answer is: incredible.

In view of the dramatic growth of cybernetworks, a fundamental question can be raised: do cybernetworks carry social capital? If so, there is strong evidence either that the recent argument that social capital has been on the decline is false or that the decline has been arrested. I suggest that indeed we are witnessing a revolutionary rise of social capital , as represented by cybernetworks. In fact, we are witnessing a new era in which social capital will soon supersede personal capital in significance and effect.

Cybernetworks provide social capital in the sense that they carry resources that go beyond mere information purposes. E-commerce is a case in point. Many sites offer free information, but they carry adver-tisements presumably enticing the user to purchase certain merchandise or services. They also provide incentives to motivate users to take actions. The Internet has also provided avenues for exchanges and possible formation of collectivities (Fernback 1997; Jones 1997b; Watson 1997) These「virtual」connections allow users to connect with others with few time or space constraints. Access to information in conjunction with interactive facilities makes cybernetworks not only rich in social capital, but also an important investment for participants’ purposive actions in both the production and consumption markets.

Just as pertinent is the debate on whether globalization of cybernetworks represents a reproduction of the world system where the core states or actors continue to dominate and indeed「colonize」peripheral states/actors by incorporating the latter into global economic systems dominated by the former (Brecher and Costello 1998; Browne and Fishwick 1998; Sassen and Appiah 1998). This argument is supported by evidence that international organizations, international corporations, and international economic forms, such as commodity chains, are dominated by the values, culture, and authority of dominant states’ corporations or by these states themselves. There is much concern about the increasing inequality of access to cyberspace around the world. As the rich countries and actors gain greater access to capital in cyberspace, the poor countries and actors are largely shut out from the cybercommunity.

Yet, cybernetworks suggest, at least for those who gain access to cyberspace, the possibility of a bottom-up globalization process whereby entrepreneurship and group formations become viable without the dominance of any particular class of actors (Wellman 1998). Do cybernetworks suggest a neo-globalization process? While not denying that the dominant states and actors remain actively interested in controlling the development of cyberspace, I argue that cybernetworks represent a new era of democratic and entrepreneur networks and relations in which resources flow and are shared by a large number of participants with new rules and practices, many of which are devoid of colonial intent or capability.

With the increasing availability of inexpensive devices and ever-increasing Web capabilities that transcend space and time, we are facing a new era of social networks in the form of global villages. Globalization of cybernetworks is a double-edged sword. More sharply than ever, it demarcates the haves and the have-nots in terms of accessing capital embedded in cyberspace. Access to computers, other devices, and the Internet remains distributed unequally because of social (e.g., lack of education and facility in the language), economic (e.g., ability to acquire computers and gain access to the communications infrastructure), and political (e.g., authoritarian control over access) constraints. Yet, within the cybernetworks, it is no longer necessary or possible to reproduce the core-peripheral world system, in which the core actors establish links and networks to peripheral actors for their continuing domination of information, resources, and surplus values. Instead, information is freer and more available to more individuals than ever before in human history. It is also clear that constraints and control over access are waning fast as computer and communication costs decrease and technology leapfrogs the traditional authoritarian control of access.

There is strong evidence that an increasing number of individuals are engaged in this new form of social networks and relations, and there is little doubt that a significant part of the activities involve the creation and use of social capital. Access to free sources of information, data, and other actors has created growing networks and social capital at an unprecedented pace. Networks are expansive and yet at the same time intimate. Networking transcends time (connecting whenever one can and wants to) and space (accessing sites around the globe directly or indirectly if direct access is denied). Rules and practices are being formulated as such networks are constructed. Institutions – borrowed from past practices, deliberately deviating from past practices, or consensually developed by participants – are being created as such networks (e.g., villages) are being built.

There is little doubt that the hypothesis that social capital is declining can be refuted if one goes beyond the traditional interpersonal networks and analyzes the cybernetworks that emerged in the 1990s. We are witnessing the beginning of a new era in which social capital is far outpacing personal capital in significance and effect. We need to compile basic data and information on the extent to which individuals are spending time and effort engaging others over cybernetworks, compared to the use of time and effort for interpersonal communications, other leisure activities (TV watching, travel, eating out, movie- and theatergoing), attend-ing civic and local meetings, and so on. We also need to estimate the amount of useful information gathered through cybernetworks compared to traditional media.

In the next section, I will offer a case study, concerning the recent Falun Gong movement in China, as an example of how cybernetworks provide social capital in a social movement and sustain collective action even within an extremely constrained institutional field. This example shows

how cybernetworks facilitate the use of social capital over space and time, and demonstrates effectiveness in generating and sustaining a social movement in a global context. Whether the movement itself has any merit is of no interest here.

因特网与电子网络：新社会资本的出现

电子网络可以定义为，电子空间中特别是因特网中的社会网络 [2]。这些网络是由个体或一群个体通过电子邮件、聊天室、新闻群组和俱乐部（Jones, 1997b, Smith 和 Kollock,1999）等形式建立起来的，或者是由非正式和正式的（例如经济的、政治的、宗教的、媒体的）组织为了交换（包括资源交易与关系强化）的目的而建立的。到 20 世纪 90 年代早期，电子网络已经成为全球性交流的一个主要渠道，对其程度与范围进行透视是很有趣的。

自从 70 年代晚期和 80 年代早期开始，个人电脑（PC 机）已经渗透到全世界的工厂与家庭中。在北美、欧洲和东亚国家中，个人电脑的出现与普及速度超过了其他很多通讯产品。根据经济分析局（Bureau of Economic Analysis）局长史蒂文·兰德费尔德（Steven Landefeld）的报告（USA Today March 17, 1999），1997 年美国消费者购买的电脑数量超过汽车。根据 the Intel Architecture Business Group `*` 的执行副总裁兼总经理保罗·奥特里尼（Paul Otellini）的报告（Intel Developer Forum, February 25, 1999），2000 年世界个人电脑销量已经超过电视机。事实上，澳大利亚、加拿大、丹麦和韩国的个人电脑销量在 1998 年就已经超过了电视机。在 1999 年，50% 的美国家庭拥有电脑，33% 的家庭可以联网（Metcalfe, 1999）。

电子商务（E-commerce）已经成为一笔大生意。1998 年，网上购物的订单达到 130 亿美元（平均每张订单 55 美元），1999 年预计可以达到 300-400 亿美元（the Boston Consulting Group，引自 PC Magazine, March 9, 1999, p9）。预计增长最大的将是旅游（1999 年比 1998 年增加了 88%）、PC 机硬件（46%）、图书（75%）、食品杂货（137%）、音乐（108%）和录像（109%）。

估计 1999 年有 240 万美国成年人在网上购物，大约是 1998 年的网上购物人数（780 万）的四倍，单是假日网上购物金额，1999 年就可以超过 130 亿美元。在 1999 年，电子商务的增长速度是大多数世界经济体经济增长速度的 30 倍，将达到 680 亿美元。估计到 2002 年，在网上购买的物品中，图书和花卉等易携品的价值将达到 320 亿美元，旅游与电脑等发展性购置将达到 560 亿美元，食品杂货等补充品将达到 190 亿美元。另一项估计显示，到 2002 年将有 40% 的网络用户成为在线购买者，电子商务交易将达到 4000 亿美元。1998 年上半年，五分之一的股票零售交易是在网上进行的。现在估计有 430 万人在线购买股票和基金，预计到 2003 年在线交易可以占到美国投资市场总量的 31%。

1999 年 3 月 16 日，美国商业部废止了使用了 60 年的工业分类体系，因为这个体系没有包含信息经济。例如，计算机甚至不作为个独立的工业分类，只被归为计算器一类。新分类体系更好地反映了信息革命所产生的新经济类别。随着美国与墨西哥和加拿大这些国家的贸易的持续增长，新体系的设计也类似于这些国家的分类体系。此外，商业部将开始公布网上购物对零售活动影响的数字，这将是国家经济健康发展的一个重要指标。到目前为止，商业部已经将网上购物的数字与分类销售混在一起，纳入了总销售额中。作为独立部分统计的 1998 年和 1990 年的因特网销售数据，可以在 2000 年中看到。

通过因特网交流与结成社会络的现象虽然是近来的事情，但却比个人电脑本身的发展还要快。由于 80 年代 CERN（在瑞士日内瓦的欧洲粒子物理实验室 the European Particle Physics Laboratory）的提姆·伯纳斯·李（Tim Berners-Lee）的超文本技术的发明，以及 1991 年夏天万维网（World Wide web）的引入，因特在过去 10 年里发生了革命性的变化。1995 年，美国的 3200 万家庭中有 1410 万拥有调制解调器，到 1999 年的 1 月，5000 万美国家庭中有 3770 万拥有调制解调器。1997 年全球的网络用户有 6870 万，1998 年达到 9730 万，预计到 2001 年络用户数量将超过 3 亿。与 1999 年初相比，2002 年将有三分之二的在线用户是新用户。

1998 年初，美国有超过 4500 万的个人电脑用户定期上网，1998 年第季度比 1997 年第一季度增长了 43%。接近 49% 的美国家庭至少拥有一台个人电脑。1990 年，美国以外的用户数量首次超过美国，占到全球用户总量的 51%。中国的因特网用户数从 1997 年的 60 万激增到的 1998 年的 150 万（新华社，1999 年 1 月 15 日）。1999 年中国报告的因特网用户达到 400 万。美国的因特网大师尼古拉斯尼葛洛庞帝（Nicholas Negroponte）预测，中国的因特网用户数量到 2000 年将激增到 1 千万。

女性上网人数也急剧增长。1996 年 1 月，18 岁以上的网络用户中女性只占 18%，到 199 年 1 月，女性用户占了整整一半。预计到 1990 年底，女性网络用户将占到多数。1997 年，通过関络发送的电子邮件数量第一次超过了通过邮局寄送的邮件数量。

个人电脑专家惊呼，因特网正在改変着一切。《个人电脑杂志》（PC Magazine）主编迈克尔·J·米勒（Michael. Miller）在 1999 年 2 月写道，因特正在改变我们「交流、获取信息、娱乐和做生意的方式」（PC Magazine, February 2, 1990 p4）。1999 年 1 月，保罗·萨莫森（Paul Someson）在《个人电脑杂志》上表达了相同的观点。我们不可能准确地估计出，到底有多少讨论会、论坛和各种类型的俱乐部已经形成和正在形成。但是我们必须要问，电子空间与电子网络的发展对社会网络和社会资本的研究会带来什么影响？一个简单的回答是：其影响令人难以置信。

对于电子网络的激增，我们可以提出一个基本问题：电子网络承载着社会资本吗？如果是，我们就有充分的证据证明最近关于社会资本下降的论点是不正确的，或者说社会资本的下降趋势已经被阻止住了。实际上我们正在经历着由电子网络所代表的社会资本的革命性上升时代。也即，我们正在进入一个社会资本在意义与影响上将会很快超过个人资本的新时代。

电子网络所承载的资源超出了单纯的信息用途，从这个意义上讲电子网络提供了社会资本。电子商务就是一个例子。很多网站提供了免费信息，但是网页上的广告会引诱用户购买一些商品或服务，提供了激发用户行动的刺激。因特网也提供了交换与集体形成的渠道（Fernback, 1997; Jon, 1997b; Watson, 1997）。这些「虚拟」的连接使用户与他人的联系几平不受时间和空间的约束。由于通过电子网络获取信息与互动都很方便，因此电子网络不仅富含社会资本，而且成为参与者在生产和消费市场中目的性行动的重要投资。

与之相关的一个争论是，电子网络的全球化是否代表着世界体系的再生产 —— 中心国家或者行动者通过将边缘国家 / 行动者纳入到自己控制的全球经济体系中的方式，继续控制和「殖民」着边缘国家 / 行动者（Brecher 和 Costello, 1998; Browne 和 Fishwick, 1998; Sassen 和 Appiah, 1998）。这个观点为下列证据所支持：国际组织、跨国公司和国际经济形式（如，商品链），被处于支配地位的国家的公司与这些国家本身的价值、文化和权威所控制。随着全球的电子空间获取机会不平等的不断加剧，越来越多的学者开始关注这现象。富有的国家与行动者获取电子空间的机会逐渐多，而贫穷的国家与行动者则被拒于电子社区的门外。

但是至少对于那些有机会进入电子空间的人而言，电子网络意味着一个自下而上的全球化过程是可能的，企业家和群体可以在不受任何阶级的行动者控制的情况下得以形成（Wellman, 1998）。那么电子网络的发展意味着个新全球化过程的开始吗？虽然不能否认占支配地位的国家和行动者仍然会尽力地控制电子空间的发展，但是我认为电子网络代表着民主和企业家网络与关系的新时代，其中资源会在大量新参与者中间流动、被他们共享，他们遵守着新规则，进行着新实践，并且没有殖民式的意图或能力。

随着电脑网络设备价格的降低与网络跨时空能力的增强，我们正在面对着一个以地球村形式出现的社会网络的新时代。电子网络的全球化是一把双刃剑。在获取嵌到电子空间中的资本方面，电子网络使富人 / 富国与穷人 / 穷国的差别比以前更悬殊。由于社会的（缺乏教育和缺乏语言能力）、经济的（获得电脑与通讯设施的能力）和政治的（权威对获取机会的控制）约束，获取电脑、其他设备和因特网上的不平等仍然存在。但是在电子网络内部，不再需要或者不再可能产生中心 —— 边缘的世界体系 一一 核心行动者通过联系和网络，继续控制着信息、资源和边行动者的剩余价值。相反，信息在网络时代比在人类历史上的任何其他时代都更容易获得，其流动性更强。随着电脑与通讯成本的降低，技术对传统权威控制的削弱，资源获取的约束与控制正在迅速减少。

有充足的证据表明，越来越多的个体行动者参与到新形式的社会网络和社会关系之中，毫无疑问，其中相当一部分活动涉及到社会资本的创造和使用。由于网上可以免费地获取很多信息、数据，联系其他行动者也很方便，因此网络和社会资本以前所未有的速度发展起来。网络是扩展性的，同时也是亲密性的。网终的运作可以超越时间（一个人可以在任何喜欢的时间里建立连接）和空间（可以直接或间接地「如果不能直接访问」访问遍布全球的网站）。随着这些网络（例如「村庄」）的建立，规则与实践正在形成，制度 一一 通过借鉴过去的实践，有意地偏离过去的实践，或者通过参与者的共同发展也正在被创造出来。

如果我们的视野能够超越传统的人际网络，对 20 世纪 90 年代刚出现的电子网络进行分析，我们就可以大胆地驳斥社会资本正在下降的观点。我们正在进入一个社会资本的意义与影响远远超过个人资本的新时代。我们需要搜集个体花费在电子网络中与他人进行「交往」的时间和精力的基本数据和信息，从而与个体用在人际交往、其他娱乐活动（例如看电视、旅游、外出就餐、看电影和看戏剧）、参加公民集会与地方集会等事情上的时间和精力作一个比较。我们也需要对通过电子网络所收集的有用信息数量进行估计，以与传统媒体进行比较。

[2] 这部分主要选自 Lin（1999a）

## 5.2 Falun Gong: A Case Study of Social Capital and Social Movement

Falun Gong (Cultivation of the Wheel of the Law), also known as Falu Dafa (the Great Law of the Wheel), is a Chinese meditation and exercise technique proposed by Li Hongzhi (Li 1993). Li contends that it evolved out of Buddhism and captures the truth of the universe through both Buddhism and Taoism, the two highest-level religions in the world.

According to Li, the principle of the universe is contained in a turning Wheel that, upon cultivation, can be contained in the lower abdomen of the cultivator. The Law can be expressed in three principles: Zhen (truth or truthfulness), Shan (compassion, kindness, or benevolence), and Ren (tolerance or forbearance). Practicing these principles helps the individual acquire the Wheel and keep it turning. The Wheel may turn in either direction. When it is turning clockwise, it brings the principles of the universe into the body as energy; when it is turning counterclockwise, it projects the principles outward to share the energy with others. Not everyone, in fact seldom anyone, acquires such energy at its powerful maximum, but most people can learn to keep the Wheel turning. As cultivation advances, more wheels can be built in the body from the root Wheel at the lower abdomen.3

3 Li was born in 1951, in a city in Jinlin Province, in northeastern China. According to Li, he was born on May 13, 1951 (Li 1994, p. 333), but the government has claimed that he changed the original date of birth on his official registration card from July 7, 1952 (www.peopledaily.com.cn/item/flg/news/072306.html) to May 13 in order to have it coincide, by the lunar calendar, with the birth day of Sakyamuni, or Siddhartha Gautama, the founder of Buddhism, on April 8). Li has contended that the original record was incorrect, and he has no interest in becoming a modern-day Sakyamuni. From 1970

to 1978, he worked at an army stud farm and played the trumpet in a forest police unit in Jilin, and worked as an attendant at a hotel run by the police unit. In 1982, after leaving the army, he worked at the security department of the Changchun Cereals Company ( People’s Daily , July 22, 1999). In 1991 he quit that job and became involved in the practice and instruction of qigong (cultivation of inner energy, a general and popular term for many forms of Chinese exercise to enhance inner energy).

According to the biography attached to one of the books he wrote (Li 1994), he started learning the Law from a master between the ages of four and twelve. He learned the principles of Zhen, Shan, and Ren and achieved the highest level of cultivation when he was eight, at which time he allegedly could become invisible, pull rusted nails from frozen pipes without effort, float off the ground, and penetrate through walls. He then met another master at the age of twelve and learned martial arts. In 1972, he met a third master who taught him to cultivate his mind for two years. The next master was a woman

### 5.2.1 The Falun Gong Organization

Li started propagating Falun Gong in 1992 in his native region of Changchung, Jinling, and then moved to Beijing and other cities throughout China. He charged no fees and claimed that all his income from workshops was donated to furthering the Falun Gong. Falun Gong spread quickly, and Li’s workshops and lectures drew huge audiences.

He found the Falun Dafa Research Society in Beijing, and his lectures were compiled into volumes.4 Over the next two years, an informal yet rigid structure emerged (Li 1996, pp. 132–133). The Society served as the highest national coordinating office under his direct command. In various provinces, regions, and cities, general teaching/assisting centers ( fudao zhong zhan ) were established. According to the Chinese government report, there were thirty-nine of them by July 1999 ( People’s Daily , July 30, 1999), each led by a coordinator appointed by Li and the Society (Li 1996, p. 135). These centers, in turn, coordinated teaching stations (1,900, according to the government report) scattered throughout cities and townships and, under these stations, cultivation or exercise spots or sites (28,000, according to the government report). In most cases, the coordinator had to participate in workshops conducted by Li himself, and no one else was allowed to conduct workshops (Li 1996, p. 144).

At each exercise site ( niengong dian ), there were tutors ( fudaoyuan ) and practitioners. Practitioners gathered at each site regularly to cultivate, or perform exercises and study Li’s writings and lectures (from audio- and videotapes) (Li 1996, pp. 144–145, 148). Centers, stations, and sites could cooperate (p. 150) and lean on ( guakau , or affiliated with) local work units (1996, p. 152).5 However, their leaders could not also par-who taught him the principles of Buddhism. In this fashion, he continued encountering new Buddhist or Taoist masters as he elevated himself to higher levels. He then began teaching others. After observing and studying various forms of qigong , he decided in 1984 to popularize his teachings by writing and editing his lectures. During this process, amazingly, all fourteen of his masters returned to help and instruct him. The Wheel of Law method, Falun Gong, was finalized in 1989. He spent the next two years observing how his disciples followed these instructions and elevated themselves to high levels.

However, according to official reports ( People’s Daily , July 22, 1999), Li did not begin learning qigong until 1988. He studied with two masters of qigong , mixing in some movements from Thai dance that he had learned while visiting Thailand.

In 1992, he「was ordered to go out of the mountain」(Li 1993, p. 112; 1994, p. 341) and started general training and lecturing throughout China.

4 As of April 1999, The Falun Dafa Web site listed fourteen volumes, which are mostly compilations of Li’s lectures (falundafa.ca/works/eng/mgjf/mgjf4.html).

5 For example, a site could「borrow」the yard of a work unit. Centers could be listed as affiliated with various work units for administrative reporting purposes, because voluntary or civic groups or associations, even professional associations, do not carry official administrative status and must「lean on」(be officially affiliated with) a work unit to gain recognition by the government.

ticipate in other forms of cultivation (e.g., qigong, or energy cultivation) or other groups and associations, and the stations and points could not participate in other associations’ activities, except in exhibitions and「athletic event」demonstrations.

Thus, despite his persistent claim that Falun Gong or Dafa had no organization, Li had created a hierarchical organization with powerful and efficient top-to-bottom control. This organization, built on social networks and under the direction of a single leader and ideology, created its own institutions and institutionalizing organizations (see Chapter 11) through which new members were recruited, trained, and placed in an ever-expanding labor market.

Li left China in 1995 and the Society, under his direct guidance, continued to play the role of national coordination (Li 1996, pp. 169–170).

However, he stressed that cultivation was more important than organization (p. 175), and leaders and practitioners were urged to learn his writings and lectures through thorough memorization (pp. 105, 138, 169). Since Li was the only one who could conduct workshops, the leaders and practitioners could only read, repeat, and discuss his「scrip-tures」( jinwen , or quotations from his books and lectures) together at each exercise site or on their own. Leaders were forbidden to freely interpret and extend his teachings (p. 171). Thus, Li remained the only authority in the hierarchical organization.

Li employed the same strategies in deploying and extending his organization globally. He began lecturing in the United States in 1996. In November 1996, the first international「experience sharing」meeting of Falun Gong was held in China, attended by practitioners from fourteen countries and regions. In 1998, the first North American「experience sharing」meeting was held in New York. Other meetings were held in Canada, Germany, Singapore, and Switzerland. Falun Gong has grown like wildfire throughout China, especially in cities since 1992, and has spread to North America, Australia, Asia, and Europe. By early 1999, Li claimed to have over 100 million practitioners worldwide. Some scholars have estimated the number of practitioners in China to range between 20 to 60 million; the Chinese government puts the number at around 2 million (Reuters, July 25, 1999).

### 5.2.2 The Suppression and the Protest Movement

As Falun Gong grew, it caught the attention of the Chinese media and government, first fascinating them with its claims of incredible feats of curing and supernatural powers and then alarming them by its hierarchical organization; enthusiastic, cohesive, disciplined practitioners; and enormous popularity. In June 1996 one of the largest newspapers in China, Guangming Daily , started criticizing Falun Gong, drawing strong responses from the practitioners. The responses further alarmed the government. In the same year, the government banned five Falun Gong books. In 1997, the Ministry of Security investigated Falun Gong for possible illegal religious activities but did not draw any conclusions. In July 1998, the Ministry designated Falun Gong as a devious religious sect and conducted investigations. The Ministry of Civil Affairs also conducted investigations. Practitioners responded vigorously by staging sit-ins at various official sites and buildings. Cultivation continued to flourish at many exercise sites, and Li’s writings and lectures were readily available in print, and on audio- and videotape. In fact, there was a growing industry in China and abroad in the production of Falun Gong–related publications and materials, without the awareness or approval of Li or his Research Society.

The final confrontation began with the publication of an article by He Zhuo-xiu, a scientist and a member of the Chinese Academy of Sciences, in Science and Technology Review for Youth ( Qing Shao Nian Ke Ji Bao Nan ), a monthly publication issued by the Tianjin Normal University. In the article (issue 4, 1999), He challenged the claimed scientific basis of Falun Gong and warned that it might be harmful for youth to practice. This article drew immediate responses from Falun Gong followers in Tianjin, who visited the publishing office and demanded a retraction of the article and a public apology. Starting on April 20, the Falun Gong practitioners began a sit-in demonstration. The gathering drew 3,000 on April 22 and 6,300 on April 23 ( People’s Daily , July 23, 1999). Without satisfactory responses from the publisher, the Tianjin cultivators decided to appeal to the national government and CCP leaders in Beijing.

Practitioners began to converge on Zhongnanhai, the compound in central Beijing housing the core government and CCP leaders and their families, on the evening of April 24. On April 25, more than 10,000

Falun Gong practitioners from several provinces and cities6 gathered at Zhongnanhai.7 They held silent sit-ins outside the compound, demanded a meeting with Party leaders, submitted an appeal, and sought official approval of their activities. Two representatives met Lo Gan, secretary of the Political and Legal Commission of the Central Committee, as well as Zhu Rongji, who joined in the conversation, but no commitments 6 According to the official report ( People’s Daily , August 4, 1999), demonstrators came from Hebei, Liaoning, Beijing, Tianjin, Shangdong, Helongjiang, Anhui, and other locations.

7 The official estimate put the number of protesters at over 10,000. Other eyewitness reports estimated between 20,000 and 30,000 protesters. It was difficult to separate some bystanders from participants, and the police eventually blocked off the area except for through traffic, preventing other practitioners from joining in.

were received. At the urging of the police, they eventually scattered after 9 p.m.

This incident sent a shock wave through the CCP leadership, for it was probably the first time since the Party gained control of the country in 1949 that the Party and the government failed to receive any information beforehand that an unauthorized gathering of any reasonable size would take place. Furthermore, such a gathering took place at Zhongnanhai, the nerve center of control. The Party not only saw this as a failure of intelligence but also sensed a strong threat to its authority and immediately swung into action. Jiang Zemin apparently issued a directive that evening for immediate investigations. A thorough review of the intelligence apparatus followed, and a nationwide investigation of Falun Gong proceeded with haste and determination. Realizing that Falun Gong practitioners had penetrated many Party and government bureau-cracies, offices, and institutes; that the number of Falun Gong cultivators was considerable (some scholars estimate it to be up to 60 million in China – the same size as the CCP membership, even though the Falun Gong and Li claim to have over 100 million cultivators, most of whom reside in China); and that the Falun Gong was well organized, thoroughly disciplined, and quick to mobilize, the Communist leadership considered it a serious threat to the core political ideology, to the Party organization, and to the absolute command of the Party in all spheres of life (Central Committee Circular 19, July 19, 1999). Efficiently coordinated organization, extensive participation, and collective cohesion convinced the CCP leadership that Falun Gong constituted a serious threat to the Party’s ideological and organizational hold over the country.

Also stunning was the large number of Falun Gong practitioners in the Party’s most sensitive offices and work units.

The Party outlawed Falun Gong on July 19 and immediately began arresting coordinators and important trainers throughout China, searching and ransacking their homes, confiscating and destroying books and related materials, and conducting a major reeducation campaign to eradicate Falun Gong involvement in the Party and the government. The campaign had three phases: elevating learning, or a reindoctrination in Marxist ideology; educational transformation, or persuading those involved in Falun Gong to recognize and admit wrongdoings (involvement in the Falun Gong); and organizational treatment, or ridding work units and areas of all elements of Falun Gong. All Party apparatuses, including investigative and disciplinary units, propaganda, the united front, Communist youth, and united women’s groups were to be mobilized to unveil Li’s and Falun Gong’s activities and intents, and were to control all situations so as to accomplish「early discovery, early reporting, early control, and an early solution」in「defending social and polit-

ical stability」(Central Committee Circular, July 19, 1999). For the next month, sustained, all-out efforts were made to eliminate Falun Gong in China.8

### 5.2.3 Cybernetworks and Falun Gong

What is fascinating from our perspective is that these events provide a vivid and powerful demonstration, for the first time in history, of how cybernetworks were implicated in a major social movement and countermovement. Moreover, it is most interesting, but probably not surprising, that this happened in a society under the rigid and powerful political command of a single political party and ideology: China.

As soon as Li left China in 1995, an Internet system was created by Falun Gong (falundafa.ca; falundafa.org; falundafa.com) through which direct communication and interactions were established between Li, who now resided in the United States, and his followers throughout the world, including China. The Web site, called Minhui (roughly,「clear understanding」), was supplemented by an e-mail system. These systems sustained the efficiency of the organization at all levels (from the Research Society and general teaching centers all the way down to many exercise sites and individual practitioners). There were more than forty linked sites in many countries, including the United States, Canada, Australia, Sweden, Germany, Russia, Singapore, and Taiwan. It is not known how many PCs in China were linked to these sites, but no doubt the connections were massive. Several pieces of evidence support this assertion. Li’s site was originally identified as the Overseas Coordinating Office of the Falun Dafa Research Society. By 1997, exchanges over the networks were so rampant that the Unit had to issue a statement to rein in control.

This statement, issued on June 15, 1997, warned that cybernetworks had been used to include other religious ideologies or qigong (cultivation of inner energy, a common exercise in China) content; to insert materials not approved by Li and the Research Society, including personal interpretations and the marketing of products; and to include materials illegally. The statement reminded all users that any materials, conversation records, or correspondence not contained in Li’s public lectures or publications could not be included on the Internet, and materials to be sent through the Internet had to be checked by teaching centers’ coordinators in various countries and regions. It asked all users to report violations of these rules, via e-mail, to the Overseas Coordinating Office (www.falundafa.org/fldfbb/gg970615.htm).

8 The Party claimed that it was all right to practice Falun Gong as a qigong exercise. But in reality, all public Falun Gong practices were dispersed and not allowed.

On August 5, 1997, the Overseas Unit’s site (www.falundafa.org) was formally merged with the site of the China Falun Dafa Research Society, and it issued an Internet statement to overseas practitioners advocating the holding of various meetings, in various languages, to increase the voice of Dafa in media around the world; the selection and inclusions of Caucasian practitioners as trainers and facilitators of Caucasian practitioners’ participation; the spread of Li’s publications through translation and the Internet; and an organization of visiting groups to China to learn and practice Dafa (www.falundafa.org/fldfbb/tz970805.htm).

On August 8, 1998, the Research Society issued an Internet message to Falun research associations and teaching centers in all countries, indicating that the cybernetworks for Falun Gong had achieved, or almost achieved, total and comprehensive linkage with all teaching centers around the world, including those in China. In this notice (www.falundafa.org/fldfbb/setup c.htm), the Society expressed satisfaction at the use of the Internet to spread the true words of Li (his published and publicly stated works only), as well as the activities of associations and teaching centers around the world. However, due to the enormous increase in personal e-mail addresses, the Society had discovered the dissemination of information not related to Dafa or related to religions, unverified statements by Li, and even misinformation in the name of the various associations or the Research Society. Thus, it announced the establishment of a Bulletin Board that would carry Li’s instructions and the Research Society’s announcements, the content of which could be copied and forwarded. Other individualized content would be modified or eliminated from all sites. All「irrelevant」

sites would be notified and corrected through the Bulletin Board (www.falundafa.ca/fldfbb).

Thus, by the summer of 1998, the Research Society and Li had established a comprehensive cybernetwork linking all or most teaching centers, as well as many individual practitioners, and exercised control over the flow of content. The extent to which this cybernetwork played a critical role in the mobilization of practitioners from many provinces and cities to converge on Beijing and Zhongnanhai on April 25, 1999, remained unknown. The fact that the CCP and government intelligence apparatus, which penetrates deeply into every corner of Chinese society, had no prior knowledge about the movements of thousands of practitioners, many of whom took trains and buses, suggests that the cybernetworks with direct linkages and access to information from the Research Society (now run in the United States), and among the teaching centers, exercise sites, and individual Internet users, might have played a key role in dissemination of information about the upcoming sit-down demonstrations.

This suspicion was confirmed in part by Li himself. On May 2, 1999, in interviews with Chinese and foreign media in Australia, Li was asked how he kept in touch with the 1 billion practitioners around the world. He replied:「Not any direct channels, because as you found out that here was a conference and so I found out too. Why should I say that we all know what is happening anywhere? Everyone knows about the Internet; this thing is very convenient throughout the world. Wherever there is a meeting, it appears in the Internet and many regions around the world learn soon and I learn too. I really do not have any exchanges with them, not even telephone calls」(www.falundafa.org/fldfbb/tomedia/

tochinesemedia.html). When reporters asked Li how the practitioners knew to go to Zhongnanhai on April 25, if they were not organized, as Li claimed, he replied:「You all know about the Internet; they found out on the Internet. Also, the practitioners in different regions were friends and relayed this information to others」(www.falundafa.org/fldfbb/tomedia/

toenglishmedia.html). To deny having any organization might be true in the legal sense (the Falun Dafa Research Society had not registered with the Ministry of Civil Affairs), but certainly there was every evidence that the Society, teaching centers, and exercise sites formed a hierarchical structure throughwhichinformationflowand authority were commanded.

Thus, we could not consider Li’s reply as valid. But the fact remained that the cybernetworks were well placed by then to be used by the organization to disseminate any information it wanted, and Li’s statement did not deny that the networks were involved in the mobilization process.

After the April 25 incident and the strong and shocking responses from the Party and the government, the use of the Internet between the Minhui Site and individual users was intensive and extensive. To facilitate the flow of information, the Minhui Site constructed a file, called News and Reports, to carry information from China through the Internet. For the month of June 1999, this file (www.falundafa.org/china) contained 156

messages (all but 14 messages were specifically dated), and at least half of them were identified as originating from inside China. The locations identified included Beijing, Tianjin, Shanghai, Shangdong, Nanchang, Weifang, Qingdao (Shangdong), Hebei, BenXi, Linyi (Shangdong), Shenyang, Dalian, Qiqihar, Shijiazhuang, Guangzhou, Qinghungdao, Daqing, Fuzhou, Tonghua, Zhengzhou, Jaingsu, Hangzhou, Fujian, Taiyuan, Weihai, Jiangshu Qidong, Wuhan, Harbin, Hubei (Xishui), Changsha, and others.

The extensive use of the Internet was again confirmed when the government shut down several Internet sites in China that provided free or paid e-mail services. For example, 263.net shut down more than 1,000,000 of its free e-mail addresses on July 22 for several days, and when it came back on, the service was greatly curtailed and monitored.

In the meantime, the Internet was used widely by the Party and the government to attack Li and Falun Gong. Extensive essays were written and transmitted over Web sites (e.g., People’s Daily , Xinhua Press, and many other Web-site links to the Chinese government and the media) to discredit Li (e.g., about his falsified birth date, his tax evasion, the lowly jobs he held, the brevity of his qigong education, and his possible connections with the Central Intelligence Agency). Other reports provided personal and eyewitness accounts of individuals being victimized by Falun Gong. Articles reported confessions and renunciations of Falun Gong practitioners, especially among Party members and cadres. Finally on July 29, 1999, a new Web site (www.ppflg.china.com.cn) was created by People’s Daily dedicated to「unveiling Falun Gong, for the Health and Life of the People.」It contained columns including「reporting and commenting, surveying and analyzing, comments from the people, tragic stories, selected letters, relevant websites, and messages from visitors.」

There were also reports that many of the Falun Gong Web sites experienced hacking (AP, July 31, 1999) and at least one attempt that appeared to originate from the Chinese national police bureau in Beijing.

Bob McWee, a Falun Gong practitioner and manager of a Web site, falunusa.net, uncovered the Internet address from which hacking was attempted on his machine, along with two telephone numbers in Beijing.

When the Associated Press called the numbers, the person who answered the phone identified them as belonging to the Public Security Ministry.

A telephone operator at the Ministry said they belonged to the Internet Monitoring Bureau.

It is clear that for the first time in history, a movement and a countermovement occurred in cyberspace, apparently with dramatic effect.

Discussion

The Falun Gong incident serves as a vivid contemporary illustration of how social networks and capital provide the mechanisms and processes by which an alternative ideology, challenging prevailing ideology and institutions (see Chapter 11), can be institutionalized. The Falun Gong incident was considered the most serious challenge to the CCP since the Tiananman Square incident in 1989 (Lin 1992b). However, there are significant differences between the two social movements. Falun Gong involved much broader participation, drawing practitioners from all age groups, all social and occupational strata, and both urban and rural populations (though probably disproportionately from cities and townships), as well as enjoying a well-organized and strongly hierarchical structure of command, and having the advantage of the Internet as well as cell phones (the Tiananmen Square participants could only use the newly available fax machines effectively). While the Tiananman Square incident died down quickly after June 4, 1989, Falun Gong had the benefit of a cybernetwork that remained in operation after July 20, 1999, and in communication with some users inside China.

Falun Gong provided no political ideology in the traditional sense, but it did offer an alternative ideology to the prevailing ideology. The events of 1999 illustrate that social networks built on a singular alternative ideology can mobilize individuals into a cohesive collectivity. From this collectivity have emerged alternative institutionalizing organizations in the form of teaching centers and exercise sites where「cultivation」involves not only exercises and meditations, but, more importantly, reading and studying the ideology – Li’s teachings. These effective organizations provided the training ground for new recruits, indoctrinated them with the ideology, and absorbed them into the social networks. With the aid of the cybernetworks, these social networks have created revolutionary and powerful means to mobilize capital, social and others, making viable massive social movements even in a most constrained and repressive institutional field. The leaders of the prevailing ideology and institutions correctly recognized these challenges and considered them a serious political struggle. In the Central Committee’s circular banning Falun Dafa, the first point made was that Party members「must recognize the political nature and serious damage of the Falun Gong organization.」A subsequent essay recognized the Falun Gong organization’s serious challenge to the CCP’s guiding principles (Qiu Shi, 1999).

Li and his followers steadfastly denied that there was any organization ( zuzhi ), on the ground that they had no physical location, no visible hierarchy, and no visible leaders. But it was clear that Li had put together a most efficient organization, with sophisticated means of communication such as a cybernetwork, to recruit, train, retain, and mobilize followers and create collective social capital. It is doubtful that Li intended to challenge the sovereignty of the Communist Party in China, but the alternative ideology and institutions he created could have eroded the Party by winning over its members and penetrating its organizations, thus chipping away at its institutional capital and human capital to the extent that its effectiveness and capability for absolute one-party and one-ideology rule would have been seriously if not irretrievably damaged.

## 5.3 Research Agenda

The growth of cyberspace and the emergence of social, economic, and political networks in cyberspace signal a new era in the construction and development of social capital. No longer is social capital constrained by time or space; cybernetworks open up the possibility of global reaches in social capital. Social ties can now transcend geopolitical boundaries, and exchanges can occur as fast and as willingly as the actors care to participate. These new developments provide new opportunities as well as challenges for accessing social capital, and thus alert us to reconsider theories and hypotheses on social capital that have so far been built largely on observations and analyses of localized, time-constrained social connections. Systematic research efforts must be made to understand and assess this new form of social capital. Here I offer several contradictions and challenges worthy of research attention.

1 How can we extend notions and theories of localized social capital to global social capital and to social capital captured in cybernetworks?

For example, what is a civil society in the global village? How can we extend our analysis of the contribution of social capital to national assets such as democratic society or political participation or to community assets such as trust and cohesion? What are the equivalent global assets?

Do we need to develop new notions, or can we apply the theories and methods we have developed to understand a global civic society or a global engagement? Even if we can make such extensions, which I doubt we can without modifications, how do we compare localized versus global social capital and their consequences? Are the traditional localized embedded resources losing their utility (e.g., local cohesion can no longer rely solely on localized social capital) or will they retain their returns for the local community? If these localized networks remain meaningful, what do cybernetworks mean in this context? How can national participation be seen as a component of this larger global context or village (Ananda Mitra 1997 in Jones 1997a)?9 Do cybernetworks represent added social capital or do they replace localized social capital? Does being a citizen of a community or a nation takes precedence over being a resident of a global village, or vice versa, and under what conditions? In cases of conflicting interests or loyalties for an actor in her or his access to localized and global social capital, how does the actor choose between the privileges and responsibilities of each?

2 In one sense, cybernetworks provide an equalizing opportunity in the access to social capital. Given the easy, low-cost access to cybernetworks that is being provided to more and more people around the world, the abundance and flow of information, the multiplicity of alternative channels as sources and partners, and the increasing need for and gratification of almost instantaneous exchanges, power differentials will 9 I use the term village to suggest that rules, practices, and institutions for cybernetworks are still largely in flux and are being developed.

inevitably suffer degradation. Multiple routes may mean less dependence on certain nodes and less power to these nodes. Will such alternative routes reduce the significance of network locations or bridges? Does this mean, then, that there will be an equalizing or democratization process in cybernetworks? Likewise, authority will become harder to exercise.

As the Falun Gong case demonstrates, social capital is now carried across time and space, and traditional authorities can no longer control and command resources, as before. Alternative and counterprevailing ideologies will not be so easily stamped out or suppressed.

This process has already appeared in the economic sector. For example, emerging companies like Dell and Gateway entered the Internet early, and by reducing transaction costs involving intermediaries and stockpiling of inventories, they sold computers faster and at a lower price. This has offered them a significant competitive advantage over traditional companies such as IBM, Compaq, and Hewlett Packard, which rely on third parties for sales and services. These companies will have to either switch or lose business and competition as they face the enormous task of maintaining the traditional way of doing business and adapting to new avenues to interact directly with buyers. In stock trading, electronic trading companies such as Charles Schwab, E-Trade, and Datek similarly allow individuals to trade at a lower cost and a faster transaction rate, forcing companies such as Merrill Lynch to adapt to the new rules, again at the risk of losing relations with their local and regional dealers. The pressure on traditional firms and industries is enormous.

Travel agencies, car dealers, insurance companies, banks, and stock-brokers all face the challenge of either changing fast in adopting cybernetworks to do business or facing death (Taylor and Jerome 1999). Such is the force of cybernetworks for equalizing power.

Yet, will power disappear? Hardly (Reid 1999). Resourceful actors in cyberspace will accrue more resources, make alliances, acquire or merge with other resourceful actors, and block off alternative routes with pro-prietary hardware and software to establish themselves as the essential bridges or structural holes in the cybernetworks. New rules and practices are being developed for firms to deal and take advantage of the information economy (Breslow 1997; Kelly 1998; Shapiro and Varian 1999). Microsoft is doing it by cornering operating systems and major applications. America Online is attempting to do it by blocking off access to its users from outside. Telephone companies, cable companies, and satellite firms are all competing or combining to gain a competitive edge over the Internet. Elite universities and research institutions have established their own supercomputing and Internet systems. Government and other agencies and firms will acquire extensive information on individuals and make such information available to actors and agents who have the power, authority, or wealth to pay for or gain access to such information. The federal Advisory Commission on Electronic Commerce, convened in June 1999, was to devise recommendations on e-commerce taxation policies. In April 2000, it recommended to Congress that the moratorium on the Internet tax be continued for six years.

At the same time, access to cyberspace itself has enlarged the gulf between the haves and the have-nots. The Internet, for example, may have equalizing effects for citizens of North America, Europe, Australia, New Zealand, and East Asia, allowing them to acquire social capital.

Yet, it may also have further differentiated these societies and their citizens from the rest of the world, especially Africa. According to the 1999

International Data Corporation/World Times Information Society Index ( PC magazine June 8, 1999, p. 10), which tracked fifty-five countries that accounted for 97 percent of the global gross national product (GNP) and 99 percent of information technology expenditures, the information gap between rich and poor countries has continued to widen.10 About 150

countries representing 40 percent of the world’s population were not included in the Index; they accounted for 3 percent of the world GNP

and less than 0.5 percent of all information technology expenditures.

Without computers, linguistic facilities, and electricity and telephones, many citizens around the world have been excluded from accessing, participating in, and exchanging within cybernetworks.

The digital divide in social capital may also be further differentiating people along socioeconomic class, ethnic, religious, and residential lines.

In the United States, the top-ranked information economy in the world, inequality in access to computers and the Internet is substantial. In the 1999 report Falling Through the Net: Defining the Digital Divide , the U.S. Department of Commerce (Irving 1999) showed significant gaps in households with and without e-mail across income, urban-rural, race/

origin, education, and marital status categories. These gaps increased from 1994 to 1999. As can be seen in Figure 12.1, in 1999, 40 to 45

percent of U.S. households with incomes of more than $75,000 had access to e-mail, compared to only 4 to 6 percent of those with incomes of $14,999 or less. Figure 12.2 shows that over one-fifth (21.5 percent) of white households had access to e-mail, whereas less than 8 percent of black and Hispanic households did. Education (Figure 12.3) told the same story: Over two-fifths (38.3 percent) of the households with persons holding bachelor’s or higher degrees had access to e-mail, whereas less than 4 percent of those with some high school or less did.

10 The top ten countries in information technology expenditure were, in order, the United States, Sweden, Finland, Singapore, Norway, Denmark, the Netherlands, Australia, Japan, and Canada.

Figure 12.1 Percentage of U.S. households with e-mail by income and by rural, urban, and central city areas. (From National Telecommunications and Information Administration [NTIA] and U.S. Census Bureau, U.S. Department of Commerce, using November 1994 and December 1998 Current Population Surveys)

Regional divides (Figure 12.4) likewise showed inequality: residents in urban and central cities had much greater access to e-mail than rural households (except in the Northeast). Married couples (with no children or with children less than eighteen years old) were much more likely to have access to e-mail than other types of households (Figure 12.5).

The gaps between the rich and the poor, the urban and the rural, the educated and the uneducated, and the dominant ethnic/racial/religious groups versus others have undoubtedly become worse between developed and less developed countries. For example, in the United States, almost half of all Internet users are females, whereas in China, females

Figure 12.2 Percentage of U.S. households with e-mail by race/origin, 1994 and 1998. (From National Telecommunications and Information Administration [NTIA] and U.S. Census Bureau, U.S. Department of Commerce, using November 1994 and December 1998 Current Population Surveys)

accounted for only 15 percent of Internet use in a recent survey (CNNIC

1999). About 60 percent of Chinese users were college educated (versus 38 percent of U.S. users).

Thus, ethnic and gender differences in Internet use (Poster 1998; Sassen 1998, Chaps. 5 and 9) and the level of the country’s technological development increase inequality (Castells 1998, Chap. 2), and are compounded by societal development. In other words, because technological capabilities and all forms of capital differ across nations, inequality in social capital is growing fast and further in cybernetworks. Social class differences in accessing social capital in cybernetworks may be diminishing in advantaged societies, yet they may be increasing in disadvantaged societies. Take language as an example: computers, the Internet, and communication around the globe are dominated by the English language, ranging from the development of codes to routine user

Figure 12.3 Percentage of U.S. households with e-mail by education, 1994 and 1998. (From National Telecommunications and Information Administration [NTIA] and U.S. Census Bureau, U.S. Department of Commerce, using November 1994 and December 1998 Current Population Surveys)

commands. English-language countries, already advantaged through earlier industrial developments in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, have continued to gain an advantage through the growing capabilities of computers and the Internet. It is true that other countries, due to their large populations (e.g., China), may develop their own linguistic cybercommunities, but the language gap will continue to increase the inequality of social capital in cybernetworks. Analysis of inequality of social capital inevitably relies on the comparison of subunits such as nations, regions, or communities. In this sense, traditional communities and national boundaries will remain meaningful so long as gaps in social capital remain significant along these lines.

This divide involves more than the availability of technologies. As computers decrease in cost and satellite services begin to provide wide coverage around the world, the more demanding resources or the absence of capabilities to access cyberspace and cybernetworks such as

Figure 12.4 Percentage of U.S. households with e-mail by relation, by rural, urban, and central city areas, 1994 and 1998. (From National Telecommunications and Information Administration [NTIA] and U.S.

Census Bureau, U.S. Department of Commerce, using November 1994

and December 1998 Current Population Surveys) education, linguistic facilities, and sociopolitical constraints will require far greater efforts and difficult changes.

3 The mixing of material and idea goods as social capital in cybernetworks is unprecedented. Information may be free, but the cost is exposure to imposed idea/material messages, especially commercial messages. While this cost is traditional, as it has been in printed media for centuries and in television for decades, the integration of economic and marketing messages in cybernetworks is much more thorough. There is no clear demarcation between senders and receivers of such mixed messages; all exchanges are potential (voluntary or involuntary) carriers of such messages. Although currently they are primarily commercial/

material in nature, they may extend to political, religious, and other

Figure 12.5 Percentage of U.S. households with e-mail by household type, 1994 and 1998. (From National Telecommunications and Information Administration [NTIA] and U.S. Census Bureau, U.S. Department of Commerce, using November 1994 and December 1998 Current Population Surveys)

content/idea arenas. Thus, free information in cybernetworks may become increasingly「expensive.」Can technology to block out such unwanted messages keep up with the technology and political leverage to plant them?

4 Free access to and networking in cyberspace have blurred the boundary of social capital – the privilege of privacy (personal resources) and freedom to access information (social resources). Cyberspace has attained unprecedented freedom to transmit information. Privacy issues loom large, as the ability to seek and find information about others expands at a shocking rate (Burkhalter 1999; Donath 1999). For example, there is unprecedented access to pornography on the Internet compared to traditional print and visual media. Transmission of hate messages (Zickmund 1997; Thomas 1999) and crime (Castells 1998, Chapter 3), as well as love or romance, has led to opportunities as well as tragedies (see Jeter 1999 for an account of an Internet romance ending in death).

Still more serious is the clash between freedom of information and privacy. The issue is no longer that of preventing children from gaining access to certain information; it concerns anyone’s right to gain access to information about anyone else. In the United States, for example, it is possible, at no cost or minimal cost, to gain access to digitized information about other people’s bank accounts, mortgage accounts, stock accounts, prison records, driving licenses and violations, substance abuse records, and much more information associated with the Social Security number. One person’s freedom to gain information may be the invasion of someone else’s privacy. Does social capital have a boundary, and if so, who sets the boundary? Unlike traditional social networks, where interpersonal relationships constrain the flow and content of shared resources, cybernetworks reduce such relationships and constraints to a minimum.

Freedom to provide information on the cybernetworks has also caused unprecedented sociolegal problems. When is something considered pornography by the community standard as the notion of community blurs? When is hate information sufficiently damaging to a group of individuals to be banned? When is violence advocated sufficiently to be considered as motivating or urging actions? Courts are involved, for example, in ruling on whether and to what extent information about certain social taboos can be propagated over the Internet (MacKinnon 1997; Morrow 1999). What legal actions are possible or necessary for planting false information for gains in the stock market (Jarvis 1999)?

When such messages are transmitted across community and national boundaries, who has the legal authority to regulate them? If legal entities such as national governments engage in cyberwars (e.g., hacking other governments’ data or sending hate or revolutionary messages), are international organizations capable of mediating and regulating them?

There will be tremendous debates and implementation issues on the balance between social control and the newfound freedom over the cybernetworks.11

In the economic and commercial sector, some national and international actions are being taken to address issues of property rights and 11 According to the Georgetown Internet Privacy Policy Study conducted in 1999, 94

percent of the top 100 Web sites and 66 percent of all sampled Web sites surveyed had privacy policies. However, which policies are implemented and the consequences of these policies remain to be studied.

regulations (e.g., taxation). On July 1, 1997, the Clinton administration issued A Framework for Global Electronic Commerce , presenting the U.S. government’s strategy to facilitate the growth of e-commerce.

Subsequently, Congress enacted legislation that accomplished four of the president’s objectives: (1) the Internet Tax Freedom Act placed a three-year moratorium on new and discriminatory taxes on Internet commerce; (2) the Digital Millennium Copyright Act ratified and implemented the World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO) Copyright Treaty and the WIPO Performances and Phonograms Treaty, protecting copyrighted material online; (3) the Government Paperwork Elimination Act encouraged prompt implementation of e-filing and record-keeping systems by the federal government; and (4) the Children’s Online Privacy Protection Act protected the privacy of young children online. In May 1998, the World Trade Organization (WTO) reached an agreement by which members would continue the practice of not imposing customs duties on e-commerce transmissions. The Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) and industry groups issued a declaration in October 1998 supporting the tax principles outlined in Clinton’s strategy and opposing discriminatory taxation imposed on Internet and e-commerce. But at the moment, the growth of cybernetworks is substantially outpacing such national and international efforts to regulate them.

5 Actions seem to gain the upper hand in interactions with structures in cybernetworks (McLaughlin, Osborne, and Ellison 1997; Smith 1999; Wellman and Gulia 1999). Individuals, groups, and organizations can create institutions and capital by forming chat rooms, clubs, and groups without many structural constraints. Rules and practices are being created and implemented as these「villages」evolve (Agre 1998). What are the motives for extending networks in cyberspace, and what are the intended goals and payoffs (Kollock 1999)? Is wealth superseded by reputation, power, or sentiment as the expected return in such villages? Are there definitions and declarations of membership, control of boundaries, and rules of exchange and commitment in sharing resources?

Capital in the form of credentials is being created and conferred, and markets for the capital are being created. In higher education, for example, tens of thousands of courses were available online in 1999 (tele-campus.edu), and the estimate was that the number of people taking at least one college course over the Internet would triple by the year 2002 to about 2.2 million in the United States alone ( PC World , July 1999, p. 39). Virtual degrees were rapidly being granted online (e.g., virtual universities such as Jones International University, accredited by the North Central Association of Colleges and Schools, 1999, www.jonesinternational.edu and virtual masters in business administration offered by Duke University, among others).

Social movements challenging existing institutions have benefited from the opportunity afforded by cybernetworks to mobilize social capital.

The Falun Gong incident created a new ball game in challenging existing ideologies and institutions. Will cybernetworks improve the opportunities for peaceful transitions and transformations, or will they accelerate dramatic changes in social institutions (Gurak 1999; Uncapher 1999)? Will they supplement or replace face-to-face exchanges for social capital? Will they help the disadvantaged in mounting collective actions (Schmitz 1997; Mele 1999)?

Inevitably there will be tensions, conflicts, violence, competition, and coordination issues among the villages in cyberspace. When and how do villages claim self-defense or self-interest and invade other villages for resources? How do villages become imperial or colonial powers?

How do villages defend themselves and form coalitions? Will a「United Nations」emerge in cyberspace, and under what rules and practices? Would such a global body be dominated by the core villages?

研究日程

电子空间的发展以及电子空间中的社会、经济和政治网络的出现，预示着社会资本的建构与发展的新时代到来。社会资本不再为时间或空间所约束，电子网络开启了社会资本全球化的可能性。社会关系现在可以超越地理政治边界的约束，行动者可以在想交换的时侯迅速地实现交换。这些新情况为行动者获取社会资本提供了新的机会与挑战，从而也提醒我们要重新考虑社会资本的理论与假设，这些假设迄今为止仍然主要建立在对地方化的、受时间约束的社会联系的观察与分析的基础之上。要理解和评价这种新形式的社会资本，必须进行系统的研究。这里我提出几个值得研究人员注意的矛盾和假设。

1、我们如何将地方化的社会资本概念和理论扩展为全球性的、在电子网络中获得的社会资本的概念和理论？例如，地球村中的市民社会是个什么样子？我们如何将理论扩展到对诸如民主社会和政治参与等国家性社会资本的分析？我们如何将理论扩展到对诸如信任和凝聚力等集体性社会资本的分析？与此相对的全球性社会资本是什么？我们需要发展新概念吗？或者说我们是否可以利用我们已有的理论和方法来理解一种全球性的市民社会或全球式参与？即使我们可以进行这样的扩展 —— 我对没有修改的扩展效果是感到怀疑的，我们如何对地方化与全球化的社会资本及其影响进行比较？传统的地方性嵌入资源失去效应了吗（例如地方凝聚力可能不再单纯地依靠地方性社会资本）？或者说它们能够保证地方社区的回报吗？如果这些地方性的网络仍然有意义，在这种情况下电子网络意味着什么？如何看待国家在更大的地球村中的参与（Ananda Mitra, 1997 in Jones, 1997a）？[3] 电子网络代表了追加的社会资本，还是对地方性社会资本的取代？做一个社区或者国家的公民优越于做一个地球村的居民吗，抑或相反？各在什么条件下成立？如果一个行动者获取地方性社会资本与获取全球性社会资本的利益或者忠诚性存在冲突，那么这个行动者如何在每一方所带来的好处与要承担的责任之间进行选择呢？

[3] 我使用「村」的概念，是想表达电子网络的规则、实践和制度仍然在变动，并处于发展过程中。

2、在某种意义上，电子网络为行动者获取社会资本提供了一个平等化的机会。由于电子网络的低成本与易获取性，世界上越来越多的人可以使用电子网络，信息从而变得更丰富、流动性更强，另类（alternative）渠道的来源与合作伙伴变得多样化，行动者对短暂性交易的需要不断增加、也更喜欢这种交易，这样权力差异必然会减小。多个路径意味着可以减少对某些节点的依赖，减少这些节点的权力。这些另类的路径降低了网络位置或桥梁的重要性吗？那么这意味着电子网络中将会出现平等化与民主化的进程吗？与此相联系的是，权威将会很难行使吗？

上面的过程已经出现在经济部门中。例如，像 Dell 和 Gateway 这样的公司很早就进人因特网世界，它们通过减少中间商与减少存货的方式来降低交易成本，因此它们销售电脑的速度很快，价格也很便宜，这使它们具有重要的竟争优势。因为像 IBM、康柏和惠普等传统的电脑公司主要靠第三方销售与服务。这些传统的电脑公司要么转变经营战略，要么就会失掉生意与竞争，因此它们面临着巨大的任务：

一方面要继续采用传统的方法做生意；另一方面还要适应直接与顾客互动的新经营策略。在股票交易中，像 Charles Schwab、E-Trade 和 Datek 等电子交易公司使个人的交易成本降低、交易速度加快，而迫使美林（Merrill Lynch）冒着失掉与地方和地区证券商的生意关系的风险，去适应新的规则。传统公司与行业的压力非常大。旅行社、汽车商、保险公司、银行和股票经纪人都面临着挑战，要么迅速采用电子络做生意，要么面临着死亡（Taylor and Jerome,1999）。这是电子网络夷平权力的力量。

然而，权力会消失吗？这几乎不可能（Reid, 1990）。电子空间中资源丰富的行动者将获得更多的资源，他们会与其他资源丰富的行动者结成联盟，合并或者吞掉后者，并且会用所有的硬件和软件资源封锁其他途径，以使自己成为电子网络中的重要桥梁或结构洞。各种公司正在发展新规则与新实践，以应付和利用信息经济（Breslow, 1997, 1998; Shapiro and Varian, 1999）。微软垄断操作系统与主要的应用程序的做法就是一个例子。美国在线（American Online）也是一个例子，它正在尽力阻止用户使用其他公司的网络。电话公司、有线电缆公司和卫星通讯公司都在竞争或者合并，以在因特中得竞争优势。著名的大学和研究机构已经建立了自己的超级计算机与因特网体系。政府以及其他机构与公司可以通过网络获得个人的全面信息，有权限的、已经支付信息费用的或者专门获取这些信息的行动者与机构也可以利用这些个人信息。1990 年 6 月，联邦电子商务咨询委员会（the Federal Advisory Commission on Electronic Commerce）举行会议，负设计电子商务的税收方案。2000 年 4 月，联邦电子商务咨询委员会建议国会 6 年后再推行因特网税收政策。

同时，电子空间的获取本身已经扩大了富人 / 富国与穷人 / 穷国之间的差距。对于北美、欧洲、澳大利亚、新西兰和东亚的公民而言，因特网可能具有平等化的效应，有助于他们对社会资本的获取。但是因特网也可能扩大这些社会及其公民，与世界其他社会特别是非洲的社会之间的差距。

根据 1999 年国际数据集团（International Data Corporation）/ 世界时报的全球资讯社会指标（World Times Information Society Index）的数据（PC magazine, June 8, 1990 p10）—— 它们追踪了占全球国民生产总值（GNP）的 97% 和全球信息技术支出的 99% 的 55 个国家，富国与穷国之间的信息差距在继续扩大。[4] 占世界人ロ 40% 的 159 个左右的国家不包括在这个指标体系中，它们只占世界国民生产总值的 3%，不足世界信息技术支出的 0.5%。由于没有电脑、语言设备、电和电话，世界上的很多公民将被挡在因特网世界之外，不能在电子网络中获取资源、相互参与和进行交换。

[4] 信息技术支出排在前 10 位的国家依次是美国、瑞典、芬兰、新加坡、挪威、丹麦、荷兰、澳大利亚、日本和加拿大。

社会资本的数字化区隔，可能会沿着社会经济地位、种族、宗教和居住地的方向使人们产生进一步的分化。即使在处于世界信息经济领头羊位置的美国，人们使用计算机与因特上的机会也存在着很大的不平等。美国商业部（Irving, 1999）在 1999 年的《从网络中跌落：界定数字化区隔》（Falling Through the Net: Defining the Digital Divide）报告中，以收入、城市-农村、种族 / 血统、教育和婚姻地位为分类，指出各类别的家庭在使用电子邮件上存在着巨大的差别。从 1994 年到 1999 年，这些差距一直在扩大。

如图 12.1 所示，在 1999 年，收人超过 75000 美元的美国家庭使用电子邮件的比例是 40-45%，而收入低于 14999 美元的家庭使用电子邮件的 比例只有 4-6%。图 12.2 显示，超过 1/5（21.5%）的白人家庭使用电子邮件，而黑人与西班牙裔家庭的这一比例不足 8%。教育分类（图 12.3）表明了同样的情况：拥有大学以上学历成员的家庭，使用电子邮件的比例接近五分之ニ（38.3%），而拥有高中以下学历成员的家庭使用电子邮件的比例不足 4%。地区（图 12.4）差别也表现出了不平等：居住在城市与中心城市的家庭比住在农村的家庭更多使用电子邮件（东北地区除外）。夫妻家庭（有孩子或者孩子未满 18 岁）比其他类型的家庭更可能使用电子邮件（图 12.5）。

图 12.1 根据收入与农村、域市、中心城市的交叉分类，使用电子邮件的美国家庭所占的比例（1994 年和 1998 年）。（数据来自美国国家电信与资讯管理局和美国人口统计局，美国商业部：使用的是 1994 年 11 月和 1998 年 12 月的当期人口调查数据，是评估美国家庭人口学特征的最佳资料来源。—— 中译注

图 12.2 根据种族 / 血统的分类，使用电子邮件的美国家庭所占的比例（1994 年和 1998 年）。（数据来自美国国家电信与资讯管理局和美国人口统计局，美国商业部；使用的是 1994 年 11 月和 1998 年 12 月的当期人口调查数据）

图 12.3 根据教育分类，使用电子邮件的美国家庭所占的比例（1994 年和 1998 年）。（数据来自美国国家电信与资讯管理局和美国人口统计局，美国商业部；使用的是 1994 年 11 月和 1998 年 12 月的当期人口调查数据）

图 12.4 根据地理区域与农村、城市和中心城市的交叉分类，使用电子邮件的美国家庭所占的比例（1994 年和 1998 年）。（数据来自美国国家电信与资讯管理局和美国人口统计局，美国商业部；使用的是 1994 年 11 月和 1998 年 12 月的当期人口调查数据）

与发达国家相比，发展中国家的富人与穷人、城市与农村、教育程度高与教育程度低、占优势地位的族群 / 种族 / 宗教群体与其他群体之间的差距更大。例如最近的调査（中国互联网信息中心）显示，美国有将近一半的因特网用户是女性，而中国的女性因特网用户只占 15%。

1『现在中国的女性上网比例已经远超美国的了，哈哈。（2021-01-06）』

因此，因特网使用上的族群与性别差异（Poster, 1998; 1998，第五章和第九章），以及国家技术发展层次上的差异都增加了不平等性（Castells 1998，第二章）。换言之，由于各国在技术能力与各类资本上存在着差异，因此社会资本的不平等在电子网络中迅速发展。在发达国家中，各社会阶级在获取电子网络性社会资本上的差异正在变小，但是不发达国家的情况可能恰恰相反。以语言为例，计算机、因特网与全球性交流都被英语垄断了，这种情况从编码的发展到常用的用户命令程度各异。英语世界通过 19 世纪和 20 世纪的早期工业发展而处于世界体系的有利地位，现在它们通过发展计算机与因特网，继续在世界体系中占据着优势地位。其他国家（例如中国）由于庞大的人口原因，可能要发展自己语言的电子社区，但是语言差距仍然会扩大电子网络中的社会资本的不平等性。社会资本的不平等性分析，必然要涉及到国家、地区或社区等亚单位的对比。在这个意义上，只要社会资本的差距在传统社区与国家的维度上存在，社区和国家就仍然具有意义。

数字化区隔所涉及到的不仅仅是技术的使用。随着电脑成本的降低与卫星服务所覆盖地区的増多，很多资源的获取都需要付出更大的努力，要获得利用电子空间和电子网络的能力（教育、语言能力和社会政治约東），也更加困难。

3、在电子络中，作为社会资本的物质商品和思想商品的混合达到了前所未有的程度。信息可能是免费的，但其成本强加在人们眼前的思想 / 物质信息，特别是商业信息上面。虽然这个成本是传统性的 —— 这与已经诞生了几个世纪的印刷性媒体 `*` 和诞生了几十年的电视一样，但是电子网络中的经济信息和市场营销信息的整合更加彻底。对于这些混合的信息，根本不存在发送者与接受者的明确划分，所有的交换都是这些信息的潜在（自愿的或非自愿的）传递者。尽管这些交换在当时主要是商业性 / 物质性的，但是它们 可以扩护展到政治的、宗教的和其他内容 / 思想的领域中。因此，电子网络中的免费信息可能变得越来越「贵」。屏蔽这些不想要的信息的技术能跟得上培植它们的技术手段与政治手段的步伐吗？

4、电子空间的免费获取与网络运作已经模糊了社会资本隐私权（个人资源）和获取信息的自由（社会资源）的边界。电子空间在传递信息上获得了前所未有的自由，从而隐私问题也突出出来，因为络搜素他人信息的能力以惊人的速度发展起来（Burkhalter, 1990 Donath, 1999）。例如，通过因特网获取色情作品比通过印刷媒体与视觉媒体要容易得多。攻击性（Zikmund, 1997; Thomas, 1999）、犯罪性信息（Castells, 1998，第三章）以及爱情或恋爱信息的传播带来了机遇，也带来了悲剧（参见 Jeter199 对因特网浪漫爱情的完结的描述）。

更严重的是信息自由与隐私权之间的冲突。现在已经不是阻止孩子获取某些信息的问题，而是一个人获取他人信息的权力问题。例如，在美国人们完全可以免费或者以最低的成本，获取他人的银行存款、抵押借款、股票账户、犯罪记录、驾驶执照、违章行为和吸毒记录的数字化信息，以及更多的与社会安全号码 `**` 相联系的信息。一个人获得信息的自由，可能正是对他人隐私的侵犯。社会资本有一个明确的边界吗？如果有，谁来设置这个边界？在传统的社会网络中，人际关系约束了共享资源的流动与容量，与此不同的是，电子网络将这些关系与约束降到了最低水平。

`*` 指传统的书籍、期刊等。—— 中译注

`**` Social Security number 在美国是个相当重要的个人索引号码，类似于身份证号码。—— 中译注

在电子网络上提供信息的自由，也引起了前所未有的社会法律问題。什么时候社区可以将自认为是色情作品的东西标定为社区的污损物？足以伤害些个体的仇恨信息什么时候能被禁止？什么时候能将暴力视为鼓动性的行动？至于法庭，可能要裁决某些社会禁忌的信息是否以及在什么程度上可以在因特网上传播（Mac kinnon, 1997; Morrow, 1999）。对于那些为了获利而在股票市场上散布假信息的行为，可能或者需要采取什么法律措施（Jarvis, 1999）?

信息的传播什么时候会跨越社区与国家的边界？谁有权规范它们？如果像国家这样的法律实体参与电子战（Cyberwars）（例如窃取其他国家的数据，或者散布攻击性的信息、煽动革命的信息），国际组织有能力调解和规范它们吗？如何在加强社会控制与保障电子网络新获得的自由之间进行平衡，这个问题目前还存在着很大的争论与执行的困难。[5]

[5] 根据 1999 年的乔治敦因特网隐私政策研究（Georgetown Internet Privacy Policy Study）提供的数据，排在前 100 位的网站中，94% 的有隐私政策；随机抽取的网站中，66% 的有隐私政策。但是哪些政策执行了，以及这些政策的执行效果如何，都有待于进一步研究。

在经济与商业部门，为了解决产权和管理的问题（例如税收），一些国家和国际政策纷纷出台。1997 年 7 月 1 日，克林顿政府发布了《全球电子商务纲要》（A Framework for Global Electronic Commerce），它代表着美国政府促进电子商务发展的战略。随后，国会通过了多个法案，实现了克林顿提出的四个目标：1）《因特网免税法案》（Internet Tax Freedom Act）决定三年内不对电子商务征收新税种和有失公平的税种；2）《数字千年版权法案》（Digital Millennium Copyright Act），正式批准和执行《世界知识产权组织版权条约》（World Intellectual Property Organization Copyright Treaty；简称 WIPO Copyright Treaty）与《世界知识产权组织表演和录音条约》（WIPO Performances and Phonograms Treaty），保护在线材料的产权；3）《政府文书简化法案》（Government F aperwork Elimination Act），鼓励迅速采用联邦政府的电子签字与记录保持系统；4）《儿童在线隐私保护法案》（Children' s Online Privacy Protection Act），保护幼小的在线儿童的隐私。

1998 年 5 月，世界贸易组织 WTO）的成员国达成了一项协议，决定继续对电子商务的在线交易实施零关税政策。1998 年 10 月，经济合作与发展组织（Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development；简称 OBCD）和各相关产业团体发布联合声明，支持克林顿在《全球电子商务纲要》中提出的税收原则，对因特网和电子商务实行区别税收政策。但是目前电子网络的发展速度，已经大大超过了这些国家的与国际的政策规划速度。

5、在电子网络中，行动似乎在与结构的互动中占了上风（Mclaughlin, Osborne, and Ellison, 1997; Smith,1999; Wellman and Gulia, 1999）。个体、群体和组织可以通过建立聊天室、俱乐部和约束松散的团体等方式来创造制度与资本。随着这些「村庄」（villages）`*` 的形成，新的规则与实践也逐渐被创造出来并得以实施（Agre, 1998）。在电子空间中，护展网络的动机是什么，其目标和回报又是什么（Kolock, 1999）？在这些「村庄」中，财富回报会被名声、权力或情感回报所取代吗？这些共享资源有身份的约束、边界的控制以及交换与承诺的规则吗？

`*` 这里指网络空间。 一一 中译注

以证书为形式的资本正在被创造和授予，其市场也正在扩大。例如 1999 年美国的高等教育在线课程（telecampus.edu）达到几万门，估计到 2002 年，在因特网上至少上过一门大学课程的人数将会增至三倍，达到 220 万。虚拟学位（virtual degrees）已经可以在线授予（例如美国北部地区大学认证委员会 North Central Association of Colleges and Schools 所承认的虚拟大学 virtual university —— 琼斯国际大学；杜克大学 Duke University 可以授予虚拟工商管理硕士学位。这样的虚拟学位还有很多）。

挑战现行制度的社会运动已经开始利用电子网络所提供的机会去动员社会资本。电子网络提高了和平过渡与转型的机会吗？或者说它们加速了社会制度的剧烈变迁吗（Gurak,1909; Uncapher, 1999）？它们是补充还是会替代社会资本的面对面的交换？它们有助于弱势群体的集体行动吗（Schmitz, 1997; Mele, 1999）?

这些电子空间中的各个「村庄」之间必然存在着紧张、冲突、暴力、竟争与合作。「村庄」如何以及在什么时候进行自我保护、维护自己的利益与侵占其他「村庄」的资源？「村庄」如何成为帝国或者获得殖民权力？电子空间中会出现「联合国」吗？在什么样的規则与实践下会出现？这样一个全球体会被核心「村庄」所控制吗？

## 5.4 Concluding Remarks

The thesis that social capital is on the decline in the United States and elsewhere is obviously premature and, in fact, false. The rise of the Internet and cybernetworks signals a revolutionary growth of social capital.

This form of communication has begun to show a「correcting」trend if we take seriously Putnam’s hypothesis that TV viewing is the culprit accounting for the decline of social capital in the more traditional form of participation in social associations and groups. A Nielsen survey conducted in July 1999 shows that since it began monitoring in August 1998, home use of the Internet and online services has continued to cut into TV viewing. Wired homes watched an average of 13 percent less TV (about one hour daily) than others – equivalent to thirty-two hours per month. The number of wired homes rose from 22 million in 1997 to 35 million in 1999, an increase rate of 60 percent in less than two years. Gary Gabelhouse of Fairfield Research in Lincoln, Nebraska, reported ( USA Today , July 20, 1999) that TV viewing was down from four and a half hours daily in 1995 to about two hours in June 1999, when the survey of 1,000 U.S. adults was conducted. He stated,「People are shifting away from passive TV-style entertainment.」His data further showed that researching and communicating on the Internet, rather than being entertained, took up 70 percent of the average sixty-four minutes a day of online time. The term couch potato may still characterize certain age groups, but the fact that TV viewing time is down significantly on weekdays, after school and work (4:30–6 p.m.) – 17 percent less TV watching than other groups, and even during prime time (8–11 p.m.) (wired homes’ TV use was 6 percent less than that of others) – indicates that a new wired generation that clearly prefers to seek information and interactions through cybernetworks is quickly emerging.

This revolution, based on「the triumph of capitalism, the English language, and technology」(Bloomberg 1999, p. 11), has indeed transformed individuals, groups, and the world with shocking speed and in shocking ways (Miller 1999; Zuckerman 1999). Yet, at the same time, it has brought about a further unequal distribution of capital among societies and individuals. The paradox is that while the revolution widens the divide between those who gain access to more and richer capital and others who are being shut out of such opportunities and benefits, those in the cybernetworks have seen an equalization of opportunities and benefits as wide-open competition and channels reduce power, and thus capital differentials, among groups and individuals.

With the increasing development of technology and the continuing presence of commercial interests, cybernetworks fuse socio-economic-technological elements in social relations and social capital. This new feature poses new questions regarding access to and use of social capital.

As technology has already made it possible to create virtual reality (e.g., audiovisual, three-dimensional, touch-sensitive) and transcend time (using wireless and inexpensive equipment, for example), such that love, passion, hatred, and murder are being「real-ized」and personalized (e.g., Internet romances and murders have occurred: Washington Post , March 6, 1999, p. A2; decency and free speech are clashing: Time , February 15, 1999, p. 52; personal data and histories are becoming increasingly public: USA Today , January 18, 1999, p. 3B; Yugoslav sites used e-mail to engage in cyberwar during the Kosovo conflict: Wall Street Journal , April 8, 1999), will cybernetworks break the dominance of elite classes and differential utility in social capital? Yet, technology requires resources and skills. While the globalization process is underway, cybernetworks may tend to exclude many underdeveloped societies and disadvantaged members of many societies. Will these developments further unequalize the distribution of social capital? And under what conditions?

Will these developments further segregate the world into the haves and the have-nots? Analyses must evaluate these questions relative to different aspects of social capital (information, influence, social credentials, and reinforcement) and different outcomes (instrumental and expressive).

I suspect that the entire spectrum of the development and utility of all forms of capital can be examined on cybernetworks, which fundamentally are relations and embedded resources – a form of social capital. We need data on cybernetworks as global villages – the formation and development of social groups and social organizations (the villages), especially (1) how each group and territory is defined or undefined (closure versus openness); (2) how membership is claimed, defined, or acknowledged (i.e., residents and citizens); (3) what the membership is composed of (e.g., demographics: individuals, households, and clusters; age, gender, ethnicity, linguistics, socioeconomic assets); and (4) how resources are distributed within a village and across villages: class and inequality among villages. In short, then, much work is urgently needed to understand how cybernetworks build and segment social capital. The topics just mentioned will provide data that will allow scholars to understand new institutions and cultures as they emerge, as well as the interactions between human and social capital. Most importantly, I suggest, they will provide clues as to whether and how social capital may be outpacing personal capital in significance and effect, and how civil society, instead of dying, may be expanding and becoming global.

得出美国以及任何其他地方的社会资本正在下降的结论未免太早，甚至可以说是错误的。因特网与电子络的兴起标志着社会资本的革命性增长。如果我们接受普特南的观点 一一 看电视导致了人们更少地参与传统形式的社团与社会团体从而导致社会资本的下降，那么这种交流形式开始表现出一种「矫正」的趋势。

1999 年 7 月的 Nielsen survey `*` 显示，自从 1998 年 8 月开始眼踪调査以来，因特与在线服务的使用使家庭的电视收看时间持续降低。入网家庭收看电视的时间比其他家庭平均要少 13%（每天大约有 1 小时） 一一 每月加起来有 32 个小时。网家庭的数量从 1997 年的 2200 万增加到 1999 年 3500 万，在不到两年内增加了 60%。据内布拉斯加州林肯市（Lincoln, Nebraska）的 Fairfield Rescarch 的首席执行官 Gary Gabelhouse 报告（USA Today, July 20, 1999），美国人每天收看电视的时间已经从 1995 年的 4 个半小时降到了 1999 年 6 月的两个小时左右 —— 他根据一项 1000 名美国成年人参加的调査统计出来的数据。他指出，「人们正在改变被动的电视娱乐方式」。他的数据还表明，人们平均每天上网 64 分钟，其中 70% 的时间用于网上査阅资料与交流，而不是娱乐。终日懒散在家看电视这一种情况用在某些年龄群体身上仍然合适，但是入网群体在周末、放学和下班后（下午 4:30-6:00），比其他群体收看电视的时间要少 17%，甚至在黄金时段（晚上 8:00-11:00）（人网家庭的电视使用率要比其他家庭低 6%），收看申视的时间都大大降低。这一事实表明，一个在线新生代正在迅速形成，他们喜欢通过电子络互动与搜索信息。

`*` AC Nielsen Company 为美国知名的市场调査公司，擅长电视收视率调査，在并购 Netratings 之后也跨人电脑与网络使用情况的调査。—— 中译注

这个建立在「资本主义、英语和技术的胜利」基础上的革命（Bloomberg, 1999 p11），以令人巖惊的速度和方式，使个体、群体和整个世界发生了转型（Mlr,1999; Zuckerman, 1999）。但同时，这个革命也导致了资本在社会与个体中的分配更加不平等。似乎矛盾的是，虽然这场革命加深了那些可以获取更多和更丰富资本的人与其他正在被排除在这些机会和好处之外的人之间的分化，但是随着完全开放的竞争降低了群体和个体中的权力与资本差异，电子网络中的人们已经看到了机会与利益的平等化。

随着技术的不断发展与商业利益的不断出现，电子网络逐渐地将「社会-经济-技术」要素融人到社会关系和社会资本之中。这个新特征使社会资本的获取和使用产生了新问题。现在技术已经可以创造虚拟现实（例如视听、三维、触控）与超越时空（通过便宜的无线设备即可实现），甚至网络爱情激情、仇恨和谋杀也正在「现实化」与个人化（例如，因特网浪漫爱情和谋杀已经发生；规则与言论自由正在发生冲突；个人的材料和历史逐渐変得公共化；在科索沃冲突期间，南斯拉夫的网站使用电子邮件进行「电子战」，那么电子网络会打破精英阶层的统治、消除社会资本的分化效应吗？但是技术仍然需要资源和技能。全球化正在进行之中，电子络可能将很多不发达社会与社会的弱势群体排除在外。事态的发展会使社会资本的分配更加不平等吗？在什么条件下会出现这种情况？事态的发展会进一步将世界分割为富人 / 富国和穷人 / 穷国吗？理论必须分析社会资本的不同方面（信息、影响、社会信任和强化）与不同结果（工具性的和表达性的）会出现什么样的新情况。

我猜想，所有形式的资本的全部发展形态与效应形式都可以在电子网络中得以考察。电子网络从根本上讲是关系和嵌入性资源种社会资本。我们现在需要收集地球村式的电子网络的各种数据。地球村是指社会群体与社会组织「村庄」的形成和发展，特别是：1）每一群体及其领地如何界定或者根本就无法界定（封闭性对开放性）；2）成员身份如何获取、界定或确认（例如居民和市民身份）；3）成员身份是由什么组成的（例如人口统计学特征：个体、家庭、人口群、年岭、性别、种族、语言和社会经济特征）；4）资源如何在「村庄」内和「村庄」之间进行分配 ——「村庄」中的阶级与不平等。

简言之，我们迫切需要搞清楚电子网络是如何建立起来的，它们如何分割社会资本。这一章为学者们理解刚出现的新制度与新文化，以及人力资本与社会资本之间的互动，提供了参考和数据。最重要的是，我的论述为理解下述问题提供了线索：社会资本是否以及如何超过了个人资本的意义和影响；市民社会没有消亡，而是在逐渐扩大、变得全球化。