J.A. 范德沃尔.(2023).美国中小学数学教师实践手册.(张晶，侯慧颖译).华东师范大学出版社 => 0101

书名：

美国中小学数学教师实践手册 10Ed

Elementary and Middle School Mathematics Teaching Developmentally 10Ed

作者：

John A. Van de Walle, Karen S. Karp, Jennifer M. Bay-Williams

张晶、侯慧颖、施银燕，主译

出版社：

Pearson

华东师范大学出版社

出版时间：

Year: 2020

2023-3

Description:

This handy reference is particularly useful for elementary teachers who are changing grade levels and special education teachers who teach multiple grades and multiple ability levels.

Guide teachers to help all PreK-8 learners make sense of mathematics
Elementary and Middle School Mathematics: Teaching Developmentally illustrates how children learn mathematics, and then shows pre-service teachers the most effective methods of teaching PreK-8 math through hands-on, problem-based activities.

As you engage with the activities, you'll boost your own knowledge of the math and learn concrete, developmentally appropriate ways to incorporate problem-based tasks in your classroom. Examples of real student work and new common challenges and misconception tables help you visualize good mathematics instruction and assessment that supports and challenges all learners. An important reference to consult throughout your teaching career, this book reflects the Common Core State Standards and NCTM’s Principles to Actions, as well as current research and coverage of the latest teaching technology.

Also available with MyLab Education
MyLab is the teaching and learning platform that empowers instructors to reach every student. By combining trusted author content with digital tools and a flexible platform, MyLab personalizes the learning experience and improves results for each student. The interactive, authentic application exercises, video examples, math practice, and self-check assessments in MyLab Education for Elementary and Middle School Mathematics help future teachers build their understanding of math content and pedagogy.

NOTE: You are purchasing a standalone product; MyLab does not come packaged with this content. Students, if interested in purchasing this title with MyLab Education, ask your instructor to confirm the correct package ISBN and Course ID. Instructors, contact your Pearson rep for more information.

If you would like to purchase both the physical text and MyLab Education, search for:

## 中文版序