There are many reasons that our behaviors match those of our friends. Some behaviors exhibit strong complementarities: we prefer to use software and technologies that are compatible with those used by others. It is more entertaining to see movies and read books that we can discuss with others. We also imitate others because we infer that their choices are well-informed: a crowded restaurant signals good food. We follow the lead of role models — trusting in their discretion. As social beings, we also care about how others perceive us, and act accordingly — reacting to peer pressure.

These influences add another layer to how humans behave beyond simple contagion and opinion formation: people care deliberately to match the actions of others, resulting in additional principles concerning how network structure relates to diffusion and patterns of behavior. In this chapter we will explore herding and cascading behaviors, and gain more insight into why some products proliferate while others fail.

We will also dig more deeply into how and why local network structure matters. If we look at your friends, it turns out that there are important consequences to whether they are friends with each other. Beyond affecting diffusion of behaviors, these local network structures — such as whether two people have a friend in common — make a difference in whether those people can trust each other.

Ants and Lemmings

「The human is indissolubly linked with imitation: a human being only becomes human at all by imitating other human beings.」

 —  THEODOR ADORNO, MINIMA MORALIA: REFLECTIONS FROM DAMAGED LIFE

There are more than a million ants for each human on the planet, 1 and so it is likely that you live in an area populated by ants. In fact, unless you live in Greenland, Iceland, or Antarctica, you live near ants. Thus, you have undoubtedly noticed how quickly ants react to a food source. Drop a bit of ice cream on a sidewalk, and it won’t take long before it is swarming with ants.

How do they do it? They don’t have a central control system or brain — everything is done by individual ants. They interact through contact with others, in which they touch antennae and sense the chemical state of another ant, and via tiny releases of pheromones, which they can sense when they get near. One of my colleagues at Stanford, Deborah Gordon, has been studying ant behavior for decades, and she teamed up with a computer scientist at Stanford who is an expert on Internet protocols, Balaji Prabhakar, to see how these individual interactions end up driving the collective behavior. Together with a student, Katherine Dektar, they discovered what they nicknamed the「anternet.」2 The term anternet is appropriate because the system that the ants use for foraging has parallels to the ways in which the Internet is organized for the transfer of packets (small sequences of information). It is not surprising that nature discovered such a robust, simple, decentralized, and scalable algorithm long before humans did.

The species of ants studied is Pogonomyrmex barbatus , more commonly known as desert seed-eating red harvester ants, and they live in the deserts of New Mexico. Ants within a colony have different functions and the ones that find and bring food back to the colony are known as forager ants. The feedback system that regulates their activity is simple. Once a forager leaves the colony it keeps poking around until it finds food. Once it finds some food it hauls it back to the colony, often carrying things many times its own body weight. If forager ants are returning to the colony frequently, then foraging ants waiting near the entrance meet many returning ants. The ants that are waiting and ready to go react to that frequency, and the more times they bump into a returning forager, the more likely they are to go out themselves. Essentially each time they meet a returning ant they get stimulated, and eventually, when they are stimulated frequently enough per unit of time, they themselves go out to forage. When less food is available, the rate of returning ants diminishes and consequently the rate of ants leaving the colony to forage also diminishes.

As Gordon, Prabhakar, and Dektar recognized, 3 this system is akin to the TCP (Transmission Control Protocol) by which packets of information are sent over the Internet. When one sends a packet and receipt is acknowledged, one sends more packets. The faster the acknowledgments come in, the faster more packets are sent — basically the faster rate of acknowledgment signals that more bandwidth is available to send packets. If acknowledgments start slowing down, then the protocol slows transmission down.

The simplicity of this system makes it clear why humans, and many other animals, take cues from what is happening to their peers. If foragers are going out and quickly returning with a bounty, then it’s a good time to forage: it makes sense that we are born with urges to imitate those who are successful around us. But beyond simply following others for when or where to forage, humans can also adapt the ways in which they cooperate and behave collectively. This ability to imitate and react to others is part of what enables our culture and norms to evolve without the much slower intercession of natural selection. 4

But do people really behave as others have? Of course, we do it all the time. In fact, we do it even when the stakes are enormous. Lucas Coffman, Clayton Featherstone, and Judd Kessler examined whether Teach for America admittees were swayed by how others decided. 5 Teach for America selects high-achieving college graduates and pays them moderate salaries to teach in underperforming schools for two years. For example, a fresh graduate from Stanford might be assigned to teach math in a grade school in a poor rural area of Mississippi or in a lower-income neighborhood in Los Angeles. The program offers fresh graduates a chance to make a difference and learn more about the world around them, and helps schools fill holes with young, bright, and energetic teachers. A series of interviews helps Teach for America judge whether a candidate will be a good fit for the program, and also helps inform applicants about how big a commitment the program demands. After the interviews, if a candidate is accepted then he or she has to decide whether to commit or not. Coffman, Featherstone, and Kessler compared the rate of acceptance by admittees who were sent a standard letter congratulating them on making it through the qualifying interviews and asking them to join, to the rate of acceptance by admittees who were sent the same letter but with the addition of the following statement:「Last year, more than 84 percent of admitted applicants made the decision to join the corps, and I sincerely hope you join them.」Eight percent of admittees who would not have joined without the statement joined with it.

This is only one bit of a mountain of evidence that people’s decisions are swayed by those around them, but one with much higher stakes than usual — it’s not about which toothpaste a person will buy, but how she or he will spend the next two years. Nonetheless, despite how obvious it seems to us that people imitate each other and coordinate their behaviors, it is not easy to be sure that they really do. Homophily causes headaches for a detective who wants to measure the extent to which our friends’ behaviors influence our own. Do we act like our friends because they have somehow influenced us, or just because we are very similar to our friends and so we are naturally prone to act like them? 6 Did many people all go to the same movie because of learning via word of mouth and the desire not to be left out of the conversation, or was it because the movie happened to resonate among certain demographics, or because the same advertisements and positive reviews were seen by a particular group of people?

In order really to be sure that one person’s decision causes another to make the same decision we need to have some control over the structure of the interaction such as in the Teach for America study. By randomly adding one sentence to the acceptance letter, we could be sure that the extra applicants who joined were reacting to the knowledge of how many others joined. But even when we cannot experiment, sometimes nature adds the randomness needed to discern what causes people to act the way they do. These are known as natural experiments.

For instance, weather patterns help us measure how many people will see a movie because others saw it. Suppose it happens to be blisteringly hot in Chicago, but pleasantly temperate in New York, on a summer day when a movie opens. More people than usual will go to the movies in Chicago, while fewer than usual will go to the movies in New York. The mere randomness of weather means that relatively more people in Chicago will have seen the movie than in New York in its opening weekend. What will happen the following weekend when temperatures return to normal? If people like to go to a movie because others are talking about it, then we should see relatively more people go to that movie in Chicago than New York. Indeed, for each extra hundred people who went to a movie on that first weekend, another fifty go the second weekend, and another thirty in the third weekend. 7

Taking advantage of various forms of randomization, either by chance or by researchers, there are now many examples where we see people being influenced by the decisions and experiences of those around them, from whether Harvard Business School graduates choose to become entrepreneurs based on classmates’ experiences, 8 to which apps people adopt, 9 to whether people enroll in a retirement plan, 10 to whether people exercise, 11 to which stocks people buy and sell. 12

Herding, Bank Runs, and Crowds Led Astray

「By three methods we may learn wisdom: First, by reflection, which is noblest; second is by imitation, which is easiest; and third by experience, which is the bitterest.」

 —  CONFUCIUS 13

The logic behind the Teach for America example, and others, is clear. Since a bunch of smart people before me joined, it must be a good thing to do. This is trusting in the wisdom of the crowd. But crowds can also go astray.

In the Teach for America case, the students learn not by deliberating with their friends and consulting a variety of sources, but by making inferences from what others have done. The danger is that such inferences can lead to herding behavior. How does a herd form, and what is so different about people making inferences from how a crowd behaves compared to talking to people one by one? 14

Let’s lower the stakes a bit; instead of Teach for America applicants let’s consider people deciding between two places to eat: Alice’s Restaurant and Monk’s Cafe. Each person has some impression, for instance from looking at the menus or knowing the history of the chefs, about the qualities of the restaurants. Suppose that everyone would actually agree that Alice’s Restaurant is the better choice if they had a chance to try both a few times. However, everyone’s initial information is possibly erroneous, and people know that their information may be wrong and that their information is no better or worse than the information of others. There is real value in their initial information and if a large number of people were able to vote on which was the better restaurant, the majority would be correct with high probability.

But people don’t get to all vote before choosing. Instead, they come one by one and choose which restaurant to go to. When they make their choice they can see what people before them have chosen (for instance, by looking in the windows).

The first person chooses a restaurant. By knowing that person’s choice you can infer that person’s information. If that person chose Monk’s Cafe, then it is one piece of information in favor of Monk’s so far. Now the second person chooses. Since the second person’s information is as good as that of the first, the second person might as well choose the one they prefer. Suppose it is also Monk’s Cafe. So now there are two pieces of information in favor of Monk’s. But what if the first two people happen to have erroneous information and Alice’s is the better choice? The third person to choose can see two people sitting in Monk’s Cafe and nobody in Alice’s Restaurant. You have probably been in this situation before: you are wary of going to a restaurant that is empty when one right next door has people in it. Here, seeing two people in Monk’s Cafe leads the third person to infer that the first two people both thought that Monk’s is the better place to eat. It is essentially two votes for Monk’s, and so regardless of what the third person’s information is, that person should know that the majority of information points to Monk’s as being better. This leads the third person to go to Monk’s, regardless of her information . This pattern cascades, as the fourth person (having read this book) realizes that nothing can be learned from the third person’s information, but that the first two people both had information leading them to Monk’s Cafe. This person should also choose Monk’s regardless of his own information. This leads to herding — at Monk’s Café even though Alice has the better restaurant.

This example makes an important point. If you are starting to think like an economist (and sorry if that scares you), you have an idea about what is going wrong here. There are externalities at work. The choice that any individual makes conveys information to others. People choose where to go for their own dining pleasure, but that ends up affecting what others can infer about the relative qualities. Just two people getting things wrong leads an entire herd astray.

The overall population would actually learn much more if the first twenty or thirty people had chosen based on their own information and had not seen what others had done before them. Then by seeing the first twenty people, one would then be able to infer twenty votes rather than just two. The fact that everyone past the first two did what was best for them — followed the herd and ignored their own information — meant that their information was lost to the rest of society.

Such「informational externalities」are rampant in our lives, for instance every time we face new opportunities or products. Which penguin wants to be the first to jump into the water when a leopard seal may be waiting? If we all stand around waiting, nobody will take the leap and we will learn nothing, or simply delay the learning process. Have you ever waited to learn from others’ reviews or been scared away from a product that has no reviews? Sometimes that leads too few people to try a new product, which as a result never gets off the ground, or takes much longer to catch on.

In the adoption of new farming techniques this phenomenon has been quite costly. Adopting a new method can be risky; nobody wants to (literally) bet the farm on an uncertain technology. Andrew Foster and Mark Rosenzweig 15 showed how this sort of wait-and-see attitude substantially slowed the embrace of new high-yielding seed varieties in rural India. The poorest farmers were those who ultimately benefited the most from the new technology, but they suffered from having poor neighbors who were similarly reluctant to try the new technology.

There have been many disastrous products that consumers regretted trying — from Ford’s Edsel to IBM’s PCjr. But good or bad, a product has to be tried in order for one to learn about it. This is why manufacturers often hand out free samples of new products, and sometimes even pay people to adopt new technologies, especially particular consumer niches. Savvy marketers also take advantage of networks and offer referral incentives. 16 For a while, Tesla Motors paid an owner of a Model S sedan a $1,000 bonus if that owner referred a friend who bought a Model S. Dropbox’s referral program helped it grow from 100,000 users in late 2008 to over four million by the spring of 2010. For some products, from movies to cars, there are reviewers who make their living telling others which to buy. And, of course, there are early adopters who will try some products no matter what and report on them, as well as people who have inside information and as a result are quick to get to the front of the queue. 17

Externalities do not always play out badly, but they are double-edged.

If you see a long queue of people waiting to pull their money out of a bank, you might begin to worry about the safety of your deposits at that bank or even another bank. We could get it wrong: a few people mistakenly panic and start a queue to withdraw all of their money. We end up with a herd and its run on the bank without justification. Runs can happen completely on their own; however, they are usually sparked by some news. Consider the example in It’s a Wonderful Life , in which Uncle Billy loses $8,000 of Bailey Building and Loan’s money, causing concern and a line of customers to withdraw their savings, and a memorable turn of events.

As we discussed in Chapter 4, the news that sparks a run does not have to be consequential enough to ruin the bank, nor does it have to be true or related to the bank in question. It just has to sow uncertainty in the minds of the depositors and creditors about whether there will be a run on the bank. Fear of a run can cause a run. Even if you know that a bank has good investments and should be safe, if you anticipate that other people might panic, then pulling your money out becomes the prudent thing to do and a run becomes self-fulfilling. Even a healthy bank, when forced to liquidate its investments prematurely, may be able to give depositors only a fraction of their deposits back. Each of our decisions to pull our money forces other depositors to pull their money out — as none of us wants to be last. The externality here is that runs on a few banks can lead to the expectation of runs on banks we know to be perfectly healthy. Such widespread financial panics have become rarer in modern history — partly due to a trust in government insurance and an expectation that the government will intervene if needed. But there are still points at which even that trust breaks down and wider panic can hit good institutions along with bad — as in the suspension of banking in Greece in the summer of 2015.

Game Theory and Complementarities

That some people pulling money from your bank incentivizes you to do the same is just one example of the many situations in which our actions are steered by what our friends and neighbors are doing.

Sushi Dai in Tokyo is one of the best sushi restaurants in the world, by many people’s accounts. Moreover, its prices are remarkably affordable for the quality of the food. But if you want to eat there, what you don’t pay in money you will pay with your time. Routinely, the line stretches around the block, regardless of the weather. We ate there after an almost three-hour wait, which included a sunrise, as Sushi Dai sits next to Tokyo’s famous fish market, which is abuzz in the wee hours of the morning. Our experience was certainly not unique, as you can find all sorts of advice about when to go to minimize your wait. One guide explained:「We joined the Sushi Dai queue around 3:30 a.m. and were about 50th in the queue. With the first sushi served at 5 a.m. and 12 or 13 diners making it inside the restaurant every 45 minutes, this meant a 4.5 hour queue for us in advance of our 8 a.m. meal ticket!」18 The populous line at Sushi Dai, however, is not simply a herd, as in our example of Monk’s Cafe. There are other forces driving the queue.

The food was excellent, but to tell the truth, when it comes to sushi I cannot distinguish between best in the world and pretty good. Bad sushi is easy to spot, but above a certain quality level, I am not really able to judge. 19 So why did we wait hours in the cold and dark to eat sushi for breakfast, when there are many other places without any wait that we could have eaten where the food would have been indistinguishable to our taste? Because if you go to Tokyo and see the fish market, you are supposed to go to Sushi Dai. What does that mean? It’s a shared experience. As the guide’s Web site says:「We did it! We queued through the night for a Sushi Dai sushi breakfast in Tsukiji Fish Market and, having savoured every single piece, we can say it was totally worth the wait! A visit to Tokyo is not complete without a sushi breakfast and Sushi Dai is one of the best.」Other tourists go there, and if you talk about the Tokyo fish market you will inevitably be asked「Did you go to Sushi Dai?」Now I can answer,「Yes, and it was an experience.」

The sort of multiplier that underlies the long queues at Sushi Dai can become unbelievably large under the right circumstances.

In July of 2012 a South Korean musician named Psy released a video titled「Gangnam Style.」Psy was a pop singer who was well-known in South Korea. He had spent a short time at Boston University studying business, eventually switching to Berklee College of Music in Boston, but returned home without completing his degrees. What he really wanted to do was make music. He struggled for a while before recording a string of songs and videos that would become hits in South Korea. The humor in his music and videos also managed to get him noticed in Japan, especially after a successful appearance at a concert broadcast on Japanese television in early 2012. However, outside of those arenas he was virtually unknown. So when the「Gangnam Style」video was released that summer, nobody would or could have predicted that it would become not only the most popular music video that year, but the first video of any kind ever to top one billion views. Two years later, it would pass two billion views. Sure, the video is catchy, features original dancing and creative filming, but so do many other videos. It had positive reviews, but nothing that would predict its runaway success.

The limits on our time and attention mean that not everything can go viral and be a topic of conversation. There is coordination involved, and again we find externalities: we view a video or movie because our friends are viewing it. The downside of such effects is that questionable things can go viral, while gems languish in obscurity. The best content may never get enough people in the right concentration to start snowballing. If you want to predict whether any given thing will have runaway success, you should just say no. You would be right more than 99 percent of the time. Most things never stand a chance. With the coordination involved, innate quality and eventual success are largely decoupled. Quality helps, but it is far from a guarantee. The「Gangnam Style」video was lucky enough to become one that people liked to play at parties, and then talked about, and shared to the point at which people had to see it to avoid being out of the loop.

That you care to coordinate your behavior with that of your friends leads to multiple outcomes that can emerge and be quite robust. In the parlance of a game theorist, these are「multiple equilibria.」The mutual reinforcement effects can overpower our own individual tendencies. There are abundant examples in which we coordinate and get stuck on behaviors that are not optimal: we use computer keyboards that have letters in suboptimal locations because we need to be able to use keyboards in many locations and because it is cheaper to produce identical rather than custom keyboards; we speak languages that are needlessly complex and full of exceptions because we have to if we want to talk to those around us; countries end up with different customs for which side of the street they drive on, making it a danger for distracted or jet-lagged tourists to even cross the street. Better alternatives never take over as the feedback and strong incentives to coordinate mean that these behaviors can be nearly impossible to change, even after we recognize that doing so would be advantageous. 20

These interactions are different from social learning — we care to do what our friends are doing, because they are doing it and not just because of the information that we learn from their actions. It would be pretty useless to be the only person in the world to know how to play chess. Most of our hobbies and entertainment involve some social aspect, from joining a cycling or book club, to chatting about the latest episode of a series. Given the social groupings around our choices, our actions also serve to signal things to others about our character, aspirations, and identities.

The wide variety of forces that push us to make choices similar to those of our friends have strong implications. Wanting to talk with our friends about common experiences, needing to conform, trying to keep up with others, or just trying to do things that are compatible with what others are doing, all compel coordination and this adds an interesting layer to the way that networks operate.

This sort of coordination also means that homophily, yet again, plays a role. When we coordinate our behaviors with our friends, something can diffuse and spread in one part of a network and not in another, much like what we saw in our discussion in Chapter 6 of decisions to drop out.

Corruption is actually a very social behavior — we are much more likely to ignore laws when others around us flout them as well — and a prime example of how we can see different norms across social divides. 21 Given strong levels of geographic homophily, the social aspects of corruption lead to very different levels of it across the world. This leads to some interesting discord when people travel, as they often take their own norms with them.

Ray Fisman and Ted Miguel found a fascinating example of this. 22 You have probably heard of「diplomatic immunity」: diplomats can break some local laws without being prosecuted. As diplomats might not be fully aware of all local laws, this gives them some leeway; and it also prohibits a country from pressuring visiting diplomats with threats of arrest.

Most countries in the world have diplomats in New York, especially since the United Nations is there. Diplomatic immunity means that there is little that can be done if they park wherever they want to and then ignore the tickets. Between 1997 and 2002, diplomats from around the world accumulated over one hundred and fifty thousand unpaid parking tickets, with fines totaling more than $18 million. That’s a lot of parking tickets. Most tickets were parking in illegal zones (no standing — loading zone, fire hydrant, etc.).

The difference in norms by country of origin is quite stark, with diplomats behaving very differently in concordance with norms in their countries of origin. If they experience corruption routinely in their home countries, then they are much more likely to ignore local laws and to get tickets. Some countries had zero violations, and you can likely guess which they are: Canada, Denmark, Japan, Norway, Sweden. These are all countries with low corruption. The countries that had more than a hundred violations per diplomat were ones much higher on the corruption index, like Egypt, Chad, Sudan, Bulgaria, and Mozambique.

Figure 8.1 shows the relationship.

「Corrupt」countries (those with positive corruption indices) averaged almost twenty-three unpaid parking tickets per diplomat while noncorrupt countries averaged just over twelve unpaid parking tickets per diplomat. 23

Figure 8.1: This plots how many unpaid parking tickets there were by a country’s diplomats in New York City between 1997 and 2002. The number is the number of unpaid parking tickets per diplomat. The corruption index is normalized to be 0 on average, and so a score of 1 means that a country is one standard deviation more corrupt than the average country, and a score of -2 means that a country is two standard deviations less corrupt than a standard country. Data from Fisman and Miguel (2007).

Clustering and Complex Contagion and Diffusion

Diffusion of such complex behavior differs from the simpler diffusion of diseases and basic information, and even from social learning.

Before learning to play a game like bridge or mahjong, you might wait until several friends are playing before you make the leap. People feel safer asking for bribes when they see multiple others doing the same. Before joining a new social networking platform, you might wait until you have at least a few friends on it.

Diffusion in the face of social influence and coordination with others depends on more than the basic reproduction numbers we saw in Chapter 3; it also depends on what the local patterns of those connections are. A key network characteristic that captures relevant local patterns is called「clustering.」

What fraction of your friends are friends with each other? This is called your「clustering coefficient.」24

If Ernest and Henri are each friends with Gertrude, are Ernest and Henri also friends with each other? The frequency with which this is true for pairs of Gertrude’s friends is Gertrude’s clustering coefficient. The average of this across all the people in a network is the network’s clustering coefficient.

The clustering of a network is pictured in Figure 8.2.

Clustering can depend on the type of relationship in question. For instance, in the data from our Indian villages (that we discussed in Chapters 2 and 5), the clustering coefficient is .22 for exchanging advice and .29 for exchanging favors (lending kerosene and rice). So there is more clustering in the second type of relationship. 25 It is natural that clustering will depend on the type of relationship in question. If you exchange advice with people from many different parts of your life, neighbors, family, co-workers, friends from school, and so forth, many of them might not know each other. If, in contrast, you only borrow money from your closest friends and family, then they are more likely to know each other.

Figure 8.2: Clustering: Two networks with very different clustering. In both cases, the solid node has seven friends. In the tree network in panel (a) none of the solid node’s friends are friends with each other, and so there is no clustering. In the network in panel (b) one third of that person’s pairs of friends are friends with each other (seven pairs of the solid node’s friends are friends with each other out of that node’s twenty-one pairs of friends), and so her or his clustering is 1/3.

These clustering coefficients of .22 and .29 are not atypical; substantial clustering abounds in networks of social relationships, from the Florentine business and marriage network, to the adolescent friendships we have examined. 26

To see what is special about these numbers, let’s put such typical clustering in perspective.

Let’s define a friend of yours to be someone who has done you a favor: lent you something, helped you with a task, or given you important advice. You might have about a hundred friends according to this definition. Someone living in a small, remote village with strong religious and gender segregation might have only a dozen such friends, and someone like Gertrude Stein who traveled the world and held popular salons might have several hundred. There is variation, but let’s suppose that the average person has a hundred friends. As will soon become clear, you could make it thousands and that would not change the point.

Out of the world population, which is heading toward eight billion people, on average a person would be friends with one out of eighty million. Suppose that the world’s friendship network had this frequency of friendships, but with every pair of people having an independent and equal likelihood of being connected. Then any two people would have a one in eighty million chance of being friends with each other. In such a network, any two of your friends would have a one in eighty million chance of being friends with each other. The average clustering coefficient in that network would be 1/80,000,000. That is clearly much smaller than the clustering we often see, such as those in the .2 range in the Indian villages.

Geography might matter a lot. Maybe you have lived a nontrivial fraction of your life in the same city or town, and most of your friends live in that same town or neighborhood. So let’s make it a lot easier. Let’s not form a network completely at random out of all the people in the world, but instead just within a community. If you live in a community of, say, twenty thousand people, then having one hundred local friends would mean that you are friends with about one in two hundred of the community’s population. If we formed such a friendship network completely at random within a community of twenty thousand people, with a probability of any two people being connected at one in two hundred, then the chance of two of your friends being friends with each other would still be one in two hundred. Average clustering of 1/200 is still relatively close to zero and way off from clustering coefficients of one fifth or more.

Homophily also contributes, at least a small amount, to clustering. If we start making most of your friendships with other people who are similar to you, say in terms of age, gender, education level, religion, and so forth, then we can get things up to about 1/20, but it still falls short. Arun Chandrasekhar and I did this with our Indian village data. Even if friendships were predicted based on detailed homophily and allowed to depend on all sorts of demographics, we could only get clustering up to about .05, still well short of the .22 to .29 clustering in the villagers’ networks. 27

Beyond all the segregation patterns resulting from homophily, friendships still cluster . It is not hard to explain why we see so much clustering. We often interact in small groups. Students take classes together, play sports on teams together, and hang out together in small posses. People often work together in small teams or in shifts. Also, you meet people via your current friends — you know them precisely because they are a friend of a friend, and that also increases the chance that you become friends. 28

Now that you know what clustering is, let us see how it matters. In fact, you have already seen that it can lead to double counting in social learning. Highly clustered networks have lots of cycles in them — lots of chances for the same information to reach me via multiple paths, and corresponding opportunities for me to double count, and to hear echoes of my own views. But beyond distortions in social learning, the fact that humans cluster their relationships also has a big impact on the diffusion of behaviors in which someone needs to be influenced by multiple contacts before being willing to act.

To understand how this works, suppose that two friends invent a three-person game. Other people learn to play the game if at least two of their friends do. Let us contrast diffusion of this game in the different networks we saw in Figure 8.2: a tree with no clustering, and the same network in which clustering has been added. The two inventors are the dark nodes in Figure 8.3. In the tree network, nobody is friends with both of them, and so the game never diffuses.

If instead, the network has clustering, as in Figure 8.4, then the game diffuses. It diffuses more slowly than a simple contagion process in which just one friend is enough to spur infection, but it still diffuses.

Figure 8.3: Diffusion without clustering: If people need to be influenced by multiple different friends before acting, then without any clustering there is no diffusion. The game never diffuses.

Figure 8.4: Diffusion with clustering: Clustering enables diffusion when people need to be influenced by multiple (here two) different friends before acting.

The example of a three-person game is a stark one, but there are many examples in which local clustering and network structure matter, 29 from the diffusion of language 30 to the adoption of new technologies. 31

Clustering is not the only important feature of our local networks.

Trust and Support

John Nash Jr. was an amazing mathematician. By the age of twenty-three he had published two short articles that transformed game theory, 32 laying a foundation for much of its eventual use in the social sciences. By the age of twenty-four he had proven an important embedding theorem in algebraic geometry that bears his name. He would go on to make creative and original contributions to the study of partial differential equations, implicit functions, and singularities.

His mind seemed to be wired differently, and unfortunately, in his thirties his extraordinary career was cut short by schizophrenia. Much of his adult life was spent in Princeton. Recovering from schizophrenia is unpredictable, and less likely the more time one has spent exhibiting the sorts of episodes that John Nash did. But people can and do emerge from the disease. The accepting environment of a university, together with his support network of friends, enabled Nash to survive for the decades in which he lived in a different world. I first knew him as a homeless-looking man who roamed the library and corridors of Fine Hall (the math building at Princeton), often with large stacks of papers. A friend informed me that the「Phantom of Fine Hall」was the same man I was learning about in my math and economics courses. John Nash did emerge from schizophrenia in his sixties, and went on to be recognized with an Abel Prize in mathematics and a Nobel Prize in economics. His incredible life was the story of Sylvia Nasar’s book A Beautiful Mind , and Nash was portrayed by Russell Crowe in the Academy Award–winning film of the same title.

A small but important piece of trivia from Nash’s life is relevant for our discussion. Princeton’s math department was especially strong in the areas in which Nash went on to make his contributions, arguably the best in the world. As they admitted only a few grad students per year from a pool of many talented applicants, it was not always easy to decide whom to admit. A key to Nash’s admission was a three-sentence letter of recommendation from Richard Duffin. The full body of the letter was:

「This is to recommend Mr. John F. Nash, Jr. who has applied for entrance to the graduate college at Princeton. Mr. Nash is nineteen years old and is graduating from Carnegie Tech in June. He is a mathematical genius.」

The strength of the letter came from Duffin’s reputation, which would have been known to the faculty at Princeton. Duffin was trained in physics, and working in mathematics and making important contributions to Fourier series and number theory, network theory, and geometric programming. We all might know people whom we think of as「mathematical geniuses」because they are very good with numbers, or incredibly knowledgeable on the subject. But these are not people who are going to make paradigm-shifting contributions to multiple areas of mathematics. When Duffin said that Nash was a genius, he really knew what he was talking about. The letter was so short since nothing else needed to be said. Duffin knew that Nash was a mathematical genius and that was all the admissions committee needed to know.

The relationship between Nash and Princeton was, at least in part, established and supported by Duffin’s reputation and relationship with faculty at Princeton. This sort of connection is common in networks.

Let us say that a relationship between two people or nodes in a network is「supported」if they have a friend in common. 33 Nash’s relationship with Princeton was supported by Duffin. This kind of support is vital to much of our interaction, and we already saw some of its impact in our discussion of job contact networks — but it matters well beyond our jobs and admissions.

Humans rely on each other in many ways to survive. Our children are helpless on their own for many years, and they rely not only on parents but also on others for their growth and safety. At various points in our lives we are in need, and have to borrow from others. 34 Early in our history, humans had to share and cooperate while hunting. Hunting large animals was sporadically successful. Since we are not like lions who can go for weeks without food, while some members of a community hunted for large but irregular supplies of protein, others had to provide more stable calories by gathering fruits, nuts, and other foods. 35

Such informal relationships, in which we provide favors and lend to one another, rely on a whole series of incentives. 36 When a friend comes to ask you for help or a favor, you don’t ask him or her for a cash payment or to sign a contract saying that they will pay you back. When we ask a friend to help us move, to watch our children, to give us advice, to help us financially, or for aid in an emergency, offering to pay for the friend’s favor would be offensive and call into question the very nature of the friendship. Most of our interactions are not based on formal contracts, but on trust. That trust comes from a history of repeated interactions and patterns of reciprocity with the same individuals, as well as having friends and a community in common.

Gossip and rumors are things that we often think of pejoratively: people talking behind each other’s backs. We start from an early age, tattling on a sibling, and hone the skill by the time we hit our teens when we relish in knowing who is doing what with whom. Although aspects of gossip seem intended purely for the pleasure of conversation, gossip also serves a higher purpose. When a person misbehaves, information about him or her can spread through a network and damage the person’s reputation. The speed with which gossip can travel means that we know that treating a friend poorly can quickly be known to many others in our networks, especially when our relationships are supported, so that friends in common are likely quickly to be in the know. 37

Concern about what other people think of us is a powerful motivator. People act differently when their actions are more widely observed — it is most natural. This gives us even more reason to expect that a relationship will function better if it is supported — if the two people have friends in common.

I worked with Tomas Rodriguez Barraquer and Xu Tan to study the role of such supporting relationships in enabling people to exchange favors. 38 Informal risk sharing is a good example to consider since it has a large impact on well-being, as mentioned in previous chapters, and because it relies on reciprocation and social pressure. When someone asks a friend for a large loan, the incentives of the friend to provide the loan and of the borrower to repay it depend on whether they have friends in common. The friends in common, as witnesses to the relationship, can cut their ties to a person who fails to help others when asked, as well as with someone who fails to repay their debts. The incentives for two people to borrow and lend from each other are thus enhanced if they have friends in common whom they risk losing by behaving badly compared to if their relationship is isolated with no friends in common.

This suggests that we should tend to see important informal relationships being supported by friends in common. We tested this in our Indian villages, and found that 93 percent of the borrowing and lending relationships are supported by a friend in common, which is 63 percent higher than the rate at which any two households who don’t borrow and lend with each other are supported. It is extremely rare for two people to borrow and lend with each other without having a friend in common. 39

Emily Breza and Arun Chandrasekhar thought, why not put this to work for people’s own good? One challenge in getting people out of poverty is getting them to save money. 40 Setting money aside on a regular basis is not easy for most people and is especially difficult for the very poor. Beyond having a low and fluctuating income, there are always temptations and current needs. Moreover, saving small amounts of money can seem futile, even though it can be beneficial down the road. So, Breza and Chandrasekhar thought, what would happen if instead of just opening accounts for people and telling them about the future benefits of savings, people were also assigned a monitor? The monitor was someone from their community, who would do nothing except observe. Your monitor would just know if you met your savings goals.

Having a monitor turns out to make a big difference: it increased savings by 35 percent. People saved more by working more and by lowering their expenditures. Interestingly, it also made a difference who the monitor was. Monitors who were closer in the network to people they observed, and monitors who were more central, led to the highest savings levels. Beyond the average 35 percent increase, increasing the monitor’s centrality by a standard deviation increased savings by another 14 percent, and having the monitor be one step closer in the network to the saver increased savings by another 16 percent. 41 Having people be aware of your actions can change those actions substantially, and even more so when that person is someone you know and is central in the network.

The role of supporting relationships is also key in business. A typical example is described by Brian Uzzi, who got to know the New York garment industry inside and out. He notes 42 how the CEO of a company that cuts fabric describes starting to work with a manufacturer named Diana. The CEO reported that a close business friend of both his and Diana’s, named Norman, asked him「to help Diana out」by cutting her fabric at a low price in a hurry. The CEO reported:「What was my relationship with Diana? Really nothing. I didn’t know if she had 10 dollars or 10 million dollars….So why did I help her out? Because Norman asked, ‘Help her out.’ So when the account started, I gave it a hand. I cut the garment for 40 cents rather than what it was worth, 80 cents.」

As Brian Uzzi describes it,「Norman’s referral was the basis for the CEO’s trust in Diana, even though she did not sign contracts, offer collateral, or guarantee return business.」And, as a manager in Diana’s company said,「There was no talk of ‘one hand washes the other.’…It’s understood here.」

The two companies that both had strong relationships with a third party were willing to work with each other without any guarantees other than their friend in common, even though it was costly to do so.

Guanxi

In China, such social capital, referred to as guanxi, is a vital part of business. Personal bonding and a host of past relationships and direct and indirect connections between businesspersons can be more important than a written contract. Such relationships take time to build, and so require patience and a long-term perspective. Disputes and misunderstandings are often worked out via the network rather than via litigation. 43

Although guanxi can help people trust each other and work together, it also comes with a dark side with which we are all familiar: favoritism. We may prefer to offer our friend a job rather than a better-qualified stranger.

This sort of favoritism associated with guanxi was measured by Fisman, Shi, Wang, and Xu in the context of Chinese scientists. 44 As China has greatly increased its funding of scientific research, much of the money has flowed to scientists who are fellows in the Chinese Academies of Science and Engineering. Fellowship in the Academies is decided by a committee of current fellows. Fisman, Shi, Wang, and Xu measured a person’s guanxi with existing members of the Academies by examining their hometowns. Having a common hometown with someone is an important form of guanxi called「laoxiang guanxi.」The authors find that having laoxiang guanxi with a current member of a key committee deciding on who becomes a member of the Academies leads to a 39 percent increase in the chance of becoming a fellow (controlling for all sorts of other potential confounding effects). The fellows who are elected and have such laoxiang guanxi with a member of the selection committee are half as likely to have a high-impact scientific publication as those who got in without a hometown connection.

This ends up having consequences for funding: Fisman, Shi, Wang, and Xu estimate that Academies fellowship is associated with an increase in research funding of $9.5 million per year for the fellows’ institutions. 45

Guanxi not only distorts the outcomes, but also means that people end up spending a lot of their time building their networks rather than working. One cannot change where one is born, but there are other forms of guanxi and connections that one can control. When discussing the behavior of scientists, Yigong Shi and Yi Rao, state:「A significant proportion of researchers in China spend too much time on building connections and not enough time attending seminars, discussing science, doing research, or training students….Some become part of the problem: They use connections to judge grant applicants and undervalue scientific merit.」46

China is, of course, not the only place in which favoritism distorts productivity, and there are many studies on the subject in a wide variety of settings. The prevalence of hometown guanxi just makes favoritism easy to see since hometown connections are out in the open.

The full impact of the favoritism that comes with supported ties, guanxi, and other forms of social capital is nuanced because connections help foster trust, which can help in production, while also causing distortions in who gets what position and how much time they spend socializing. 47

Embeddedness

The fact that support and our local network structures matter so much also means that by analyzing a network one can predict identities. As an illuminating example, consider the following challenge. Just by looking at the structure of a network and without any identifying information, is it possible to identify which linked pairs are spouses or romantic partners?

Lars Backstrom and Jon Kleinberg took up this challenge using data from Facebook. 48 Here was the precise challenge. Pick someone, let’s call him Sam, who is involved in a romantic relationship — either married or seeing someone regularly. Now, I show you a picture of Sam’s local network — so his friends and which of them are linked to each other — and nothing else. You just see a map of nodes and links. From that, you have to guess which one of the nodes is Sam’s romantic partner. If Sam has a hundred friends, and you guess randomly, you would end up with a 1/100 chance of picking correctly.

As a start, since having friends in common strengthens a relationship, providing support and enhancing trust, it makes sense that having many friends in common would be a good predictor of who is your spouse or romantic partner. The number of friends in common that a pair of people have is sometimes referred to as their relationship’s「embeddedness.」49

So you could look to see who among Sam’s friends has the most friends in common with him. It turns out that if you do this with the Facebook data, you would be right 24.7 percent of the time, so about 1/4 of the time. That’s impressive — much higher than just picking at random.

Going a step further does even better, as follows. Suppose that Sam is romantically involved with Marya. Their friends in common are a list of people: Nathan, Kelly, Luke, etc. What fraction of these people are friends with each other? Are Nathan and Kelly friends? Are Nathan and Luke friends? and so forth.

What might we learn from this? Suppose Sam and Marya had only met recently and knew each other through a skiing club to which they both belong. That is where they met, but outside of that their networks were quite separate. Then their friends-in-common would all be members of the ski club, and would be friends with each other. Suppose instead that Sam and Marya had known each other for years. Then only a fraction of their friends-in-common would be from the ski club, and others might be from each of their families, their jobs, their neighbors, their childhood friends, and so forth. Each of them has friends from a variety of sources, and over time they would get to know many of those friends. Since those friends-in-common between Sam and Marya then come from so many distinct places, many of them would be unlikely to know each other: Sam’s friends among his co-workers would probably not know Marya’s friends from her childhood.

Define the「dispersion」of the relationship between Sam and Marya to be the sum of all the distances in the network (ignoring Sam and Marya) between their friends-in-common. Having more friends-in-common adds to dispersion, as does having those friends not be friends with each other.

If you pick Sam’s friend with whom he has the highest dispersion, then 60 percent of the time you will have identified his romantic partner! This is more than twice as good as just picking the person with whom he has the most friends in common. By looking at the network with no other information, one has a better than one-in-two chance at identifying a person’s romantic partner out of hundreds of people.

Interestingly, in cases where the network did not correctly identify the romantic relationship, it was often the case that the romantic relationship was doomed. In those cases in which a person’s romantic partner was not his or her friend with the highest dispersion, then that romantic relationship had a 50 percent higher chance of breaking up in the next two months than if dispersion correctly identified the romantic partner. 50

There is a strong logic as to why this works. High dispersion tends to indicate someone with whom we have spent a lot of time in a variety of different contexts. Our romantic partners are often the people with whom we spend the most time, especially when it comes to interacting in a variety of different settings. As a by-product a high level of dispersion also makes the breakup of any long-term relationship more difficult and acrimonious — as two people’s networks have become increasingly intertwined over time.

To Understand Us Is to Know Our Friendships

「The people you surround yourself with influence your behaviors, so choose friends who have healthy habits.」

 —  DAN BUETTNER, CYCLIST AND EXPLORER

Our tendencies and desires to match our behaviors with our friends and acquaintances have many consequences. Our herds can help us find beneficial behaviors without having to spend too much time or energy exploring the options ourselves, and our shared experiences can lead to delightful discussions and interactions. But our herds and incentives to conform can also lead us astray as they cascade through a network, from the minor headaches of getting stuck with an inferior technology to the disastrous consequences of pogroms.

Once again, accounting for network structure helps us to better understand our behaviors and the spread of those behaviors. The diffusion of a behavior that is adopted only after multiple interactions depends on the amount of local reinforcement (e.g., triangles) in our networks. How one person treats another involves looking beyond that relationship to the network in which they are embedded. Are they on the same or different sides of a homophilistic divide? Do they share many friends in common who support their relationship and help foster their trust in each other, and provide incentives for them to exchange favors and to favor each other?

