

## Part VII: The Global Classroom

The world has enough for everyone's need but not enough for everyone's greed.

—Mahatma Gandhi

The Global Classroom

My family comes from Bengal, now split into West Bengal, India, and the country of Bangladesh. Growing up, I knew that the education system my parents left behind when they moved from that part of the world to Metairie, Louisiana, was poor and struggled with limited resources, overcrowded classrooms (or no classrooms), and a shortage of qualified teachers. Each of these factors affected the quality of education. While my sister and I were fortunate to be educated in the United States and benefited from the public schools we attended, the American education model wasn't serving everyone well, especially those who began to fall behind and did not have the extra tutoring or family support at home to fill in the learning gaps.

It wasn't until I started Khan Academy, though, that I realized the problem of equal-opportunity learning was even worse than I suspected. In much of the world, limited resources, inadequate infrastructure, and a shortage of skilled teachers create formidable barriers to learning. Places like sub-Saharan Africa and South Asia experience alarmingly low primary school completion rates, with countless children unable to attend school or forced to drop out due to poverty or conflicts. Also, in much of the world, deep-rooted discrimination toward girls and marginalized communities further hinders access to education. While millions of children every year are not going to school, girls are twice as likely to never set foot in a classroom.

The situation isn't much better when children have access to schools. A 2004 UNESCO study reported that 25 percent of teachers in India were absent from school, and only about half were teaching. Even when the teacher did show up, they had not received adequate training on the material.

These types of problems are not limited to the developing world. In the United States, children living in poverty enter kindergarten up to eighteen months behind their peers developmentally. This is likely due to a number of factors, including poor access to high-quality preschools and reading materials, as well as trouble securing tutoring to the degree that many middle- and upper-class families are able to.

Meanwhile, in many Asian countries, such as South Korea, China, Japan, and India, families often pay for their children to attend expensive after-school courses. This allows students to maintain an edge in an extremely competitive environment. These programs are expensive and exact an incredible mental health toll on children.

Clearly, education opportunities for children are, at best, uneven and suboptimal for most of the world. As Stanford University's Susanna Loeb knows, quality education is a powerful force for change, but sadly, not everyone has access to it. "We try to create more equitable and effective education systems, but we run into a lot of roadblocks," she tells me.

Loeb studies education policy and has spent her career as a professor of education trying to increase student access to learning materials and individualized instruction. The United States, for instance, has a decentralized education system. Administering uniform education to a country in which each school district makes its own decisions remains a near-impossible task. Loeb also cites increasing differences in achievement across unequal groups, especially students with special needs. Inequalities also exist in how kids do within groups. Most evident are low-income kids, or those from marginalized communities, who have not had access to the same educational opportunities as others. The schools in their neighborhoods are often underfunded, meaning they offer students limited extracurricular activities and fail to provide courses like advanced math or higher-level science. This problem becomes exponentially worse when you expand the scope internationally, in places with limited resources.

Educators have found short-term, narrow, and local solutions to some of these problems, but few provide the kind of equalizing force we want to be working toward in providing equal-access education globally. "The problem remains one of scaling, and that's where technology can be helpful," she says.

For the technology to be truly transformative, it has to be equitable. It can't increase the divide between rich and poor. It can't leave people behind.

This is why I started Khan Academy. The internet afforded us the ability to go directly to every classroom, every student, and every family in the world without having to necessarily navigate the same policy machinations faced by traditional reform efforts. The social return on investment is orders of magnitude more impactful. For example, our team operates on a budget equivalent to some high schools in the United States but reaches more than a hundred million learners a year around the world—and it has the potential to serve billions. We have aspired to be comprehensive, tackling all major academic subjects from pre-K to college. This allows us to not only raise the ceiling in existing classrooms but also to raise the floor for kids who do not have access to world-class schools or certain courses. I see our free online educational resources as having the potential to be part of the education safety net for the world.

This is not theoretical. Such was the case of a young woman named Sola, living in the Taliban heartland of Afghanistan, who was forbidden from going to school. Luckily, she had an internet connection and a supportive family. Khan Academy allowed her to teach herself everything from pre-algebra to biology, chemistry, physics, and calculus. She aspired to become a theoretical physics researcher in the United States, and through incredible determination and the help of others willing to give her a shot, she is now a quantum computing researcher at Tufts University and a published author.

Our team often hears stories along these lines, though we recognize that Sola's experience isn't typical. She was able to support herself in ways that most students are not capable. But what if the next ten million Solas have access to an army of tutors that can ensure that they stay motivated and engaged?

We know that if a well-trained tutor pulls kids out of class for thirty minutes a day, four days a week—a technique that Loeb refers to as high-dosage tutoring—there's really good evidence it produces a significant motivating effect for students no matter where they are. However, we run into the issue of cost and scalability in wealthy and poor regions alike.

A lack of tutoring resources isn't the only barrier. Every student requires and deserves unique attention, and it is hard to provide different things to different students who need support and practice in their zone of proximal development, building on what they know and taking it to the next step.

This is where the work now finds us, as artificial intelligence continues to play a transformative role in bridging the global education divide and fostering equal-opportunity learning for all. With large language model applications that students can access with little more than a smartphone, we might eventually give students everywhere some, or even all, of the major pieces of a world-class education. [*]

"AI technology allows educators of varying levels of experience with a robust set of tools to create an environment that's conducive for learning," Loeb says. "Technology augments the motivation that a relationship with an adult gives them. All the evidence that we have to date says that students need personalized contact to remain motivated, an adult who they trust to give them materials to work with and celebrate successes, or support them when they are struggling."

Economics of AI in Education

A decent education is expensive anywhere in the world. In the US, Louisiana spends roughly $10,000 per student per year; New York spends $40,000. In India, government schools might spend anywhere between $500 and $1,200 per student per year. Despite the range in resources, the fundamental model is the same. Students are moved lockstep through curricula, oftentimes feeling lost or bored. If a student doesn't keep pace in understanding a foundational concept, the class keeps moving. Limited support exists for personalization or for revisiting gaps, much less for one-on-one tutoring. This is despite the fact that many classrooms have students at a wide range of preparedness—some may be ahead of pace while others may be two or three grade levels behind.

The COVID-19 pandemic made things worse. During the 2020 school shutdowns, Black and Hispanic households with school-age children were 1.4 times as likely as white households to face limited access to computers and the internet, and more than two in five low-income households had only limited access. A bad prepandemic situation became downright dire. Consider that before 2020, 6 percent of Detroit eighth graders were performing at grade level; afterward, it dropped to 3 percent. The average American classroom in 2019 contained a spread of three grade levels of ability. After the pandemic, this spread expanded to six grade levels of ability. Put another way, in the same classroom of thirty students, teachers had to somehow support learners who were four-to-five grade levels behind while not boring the students who might have been ready to move ahead.

To address the situation, the US federal government funded $86 billion for elementary and secondary school emergency relief funds, amounting to $2,000 per American K–12 student. A lot of this money flowed into live tutoring programs, based on decades of research showing that tutoring can be an effective intervention for kids. Unfortunately, years later, most of the money was gone, with little to show for it. In hindsight, most experts believe this is because the tutoring was not connected to what was going on inside the classroom, and many students found it logistically hard to access. Students might have also run up against a stigma associated with going to tutoring in the first place.

A platform like Khanmigo exists to bridge this gap—offering personalized, accessible, and high-quality education. Even before Khanmigo, efficacy studies had shown that classrooms using Khan Academy as little as thirty to sixty minutes a week during the pandemic not only avoided the COVID slide but outperformed pre-COVID standards by 20 to 40 percent. And this didn't cost $2,000 per student. It was free.

Now, large language model platforms build off of those results to provide even richer support. An AI tutor is available whenever students need it, including in the classroom while they are doing their existing academic work. It can inform teachers and parents exactly what students are working on and where they need more help. Students who are further behind don't need to feel shame or embarrassment in asking for assistance, since the AI isn't a real person. Curious students can ask questions without feeling like they are wasting someone's time.

Providing scaled support like this is incredibly cost-effective and accessible, but it isn't free. Even before considering generative AI, our annual budget as a nonprofit is more than $70 million. That's a significant number, but it is also equivalent to the budget of a large high school in many parts of the United States—and Khan Academy reaches more than a hundred million learners a year. We need to raise a large chunk of this money every year from philanthropists to keep the content and software free to users. These resources are necessary for content development, product development, and server costs, among other things.

Generative AI adds a new layer of expenses beyond the cost of paying the salaries of engineers, designers, product managers, and content developers to iteratively improve a platform like Khanmigo. This is because the computation costs of a large language model like GPT-4 are significant. Right now, our best estimate of the computation costs of average usage of Khanmigo is between five and fifteen dollars a month per user. Assuming that we will have millions of users—which would cost tens of millions of dollars in computation costs—it is unlikely that we can raise enough money from philanthropy alone to offer the service for free. While dramatically cheaper than live tutoring, which can easily cost thirty dollars an hour, the platform does become less accessible than our free resources since we will need to charge school districts for access.

That said, between philanthropy and funding by local school districts, the cost to the students in those districts is, and will remain, free. However, this still doesn't address accessibility for poorer countries where thirty dollars a year could make up a significant portion of total education costs. The good news is that the computation will become cheaper and we will get better at using it more efficiently. These two trends should help bring the cost down by a factor of ten in the next few years. If we can reduce the costs by a factor of one hundred, which should happen in the next five to ten years, it will become comparable to the cost of using nongenerative web-based applications today.

At that point, the only real limits to access are the same ones we face with traditional Khan Academy: students would need access to the internet and devices, which aren't reliably available to everyone. Nevertheless, I am hopeful that between devices getting cheaper and providers like SpaceX's Starlink using swarms of satellites to provide low-cost broadband, nearly universal access will become a reality.

One major barrier to access in the early days of online learning was language. Now, large language models like GPT-4 can operate in every major language. Here, an English-language learner working on word problems in English could get support in his or her native language, or even in a mix of languages like Spanglish. The large language model's conversational abilities make it feel like a real-time interaction, fostering a sense of connection. Even more, it can be used to do much of the translation work of the core platform.

It is exactly that sense of connection and support that made finding a low-cost, multilingual, and scalable solution to bringing high-quality access to education across the globe so very vital, says Stanford's Susanna Loeb. "I'm optimistic and excited by what we can do now. In places where access to resources and pedagogies has been a real constraint, this technology can be transformational."