# Part VII Reckonings

## 0701. Flies Too Numerous to Count

JUNE 2013

New Delhi, India

One month after the U.S. government settled its case against Ranbaxy, the FDA’s relations with Indian regulators were in tatters. The agency needed a public health diplomat to head its India office and turned to an American of Indian origin with a warm and elegant manner, thinning silver hair, and sterling public health credentials: Altaf Lal, who had spent six years as the U.S. health attaché in New Delhi.

The FDA rolled him out with about as much fanfare as a health agency can muster. It published a blog post from Lal on the FDA website, in which he outlined his three goals: to work closely with Indian regulators to establish a trusting relationship; to conduct「prompt and thorough inspections」; and to help Indian「industry and regulators understand that protecting the quality, safety and effectiveness of every product is essential.」In the blog post, Lal wrote:「A colleague recently likened my new role at FDA to scaling Mount Everest. But you know, I’m fond of trekking and climbing, and view this next challenge . . . [as] an adventure.」

When the FDA tapped him to run its India office, he seemed to be exactly what the agency needed: someone who understood U.S. government expectations, but also understood how India worked. He had grown up in Kashmir, the son of a high-ranking accountant in the central government. He went on to become a scientist with a PhD in chemistry. After a postdoctoral fellowship at the National Institutes of Health, he was recruited by the CDC to research malaria parasites. He stayed at the CDC for fourteen years and then worked in New Delhi for the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.

For the FDA, an essential part of Lal’s job was to boost mutual reliance, the idea that the U.S. and Indian governments could work together to improve product safety. The idea seemed obvious enough: the United States was India’s biggest pharmaceutical customer, and India was one of its biggest suppliers. Of course they would want to cooperate. But in India, Peter Baker had felt like a lone policeman in an essentially lawless environment. The Indian regulators didn’t behave as counterparts—in fact, they often reacted with indifference or downright hostility to his findings.

In the wake of the Ranbaxy debacle, Lal was effectively the agency’s reset button in India. He was there to build a sense of camaraderie with Indian regulators, but also to communicate to Indian companies that nothing less than strict adherence to good manufacturing practices would suffice.

One of Lal’s first efforts was to plan a series of workshops for the companies on how to comply with FDA standards. As he immersed himself in the issues, he cultivated sources within the Indian government and the industry. One senior pharmaceutical executive summed up for him the FDA’s performance in India to date:「You guys must be in La La Land.」The FDA seemed to have little idea what was happening on the ground. But Lal recognized swiftly that he did have one transformational tool at his disposal: Peter Baker.

In July 2013, one month after Lal arrived, Baker set out to inspect another Wockhardt plant in Aurangabad, in the area of Chikalthana. This was the facility that manufactured the company’s biggest seller, a generic version of the beta blocker Toprol XL, an essential drug for treating heart disease and high blood pressure. Wockhardt’s version, metoprolol succinate, reached about a third of the American market. Though the FDA had not yet acknowledged that something was wrong with the drug, America’s patients had. The People’s Pharmacy radio program had been flooded with complaints about this generic. This time, the company got only three days’ advance notice that FDA investigators would be arriving.

Seven months earlier, Harry Lever, the Cleveland Clinic cardiologist, had sent a detailed letter of concern, specifically flagging Wockhardt’s metoprolol succinate formulation, directly to Dr. Janet Woodcock, director of the FDA’s Center for Drug Evaluation and Research. In his letter, he noted that when his patients took that drug, he could not properly control their chest pain, heart rate, or blood pressure. Their symptoms abated if he switched them back to the brand-name drug.「While I have no data to back up my concerns, I have a significant amount of experience with this disease and see a large number of patients,」he wrote.「It is absolutely clear to me that there are differences that are clinically significant.」

Within two days, Lever received a detailed response from the FDA’s Office of Pharmaceutical Quality, which promised a comparative study of the brand and generic metoprolol products. At least in its correspondence, the agency seemed to be running like a well-oiled machine. As Lever waited for these results, he had little idea that an FDA investigator in India, Peter Baker, would be miles ahead of agency officials in detecting what was wrong with Wockhardt’s medicine.

On July 24, Baker landed at the Aurangabad airport on his way to Wockhardt’s Chikalthana plant. After he’d gotten into a hired car, a strange man wrenched open the door and jumped in, took a long look at his face, asked him where he was going and what facility he was there to inspect, then leapt out again at a red light. Baker assumed that he was being surveilled by the company. He was Wockhardt’s worst nightmare, and the feeling was mutual. The prospect of another encounter with executives there filled him with dread. He knew that whatever evidence he unearthed would be met with either a surly response or one completely divorced from reality.

The other FDA investigators, Dipesh Shah and Atul Agrawal, had arrived two days earlier. They lost no time. They started the inspection at the plant’s quality control laboratory. There, Agrawal scanned audit trails for each of the HPLC machines. He sat for hours and found that for ten of the instruments, folders labeled「Trial Injections」had been deleted from the hard drives, just after Baker’s last inspection of Wockhardt in March. The company was erasing evidence of the unofficial pretests it had done.

As Agrawal sifted through the computer drives, he found data folders for each of the machines, labeled「Default May 2013.」Inside, he found records of hundreds of trial injections, clear evidence that the practice of pretesting medicine was continuing. But Wockhardt was getting smarter. At the last inspection in Waluj, it had been relatively easy for the FDA investigators to correlate the pretests to the official tests, as they bore the same lot numbers. This time Wockhardt had tried to conceal the connection, by stripping any identifying numbers from the pretests.

Agrawal was undeterred. Over the course of the week, by overlaying the two sets of tests and comparing them, he correlated the hidden tests to the official ones. But because Wockhardt had tried to mask the connection, the investigators wanted someone at the company to confess to the pretesting, so Wockhardt would not be able to deny the connection.

Each night, the investigators gathered in Agrawal’s hotel room, discussing how to best isolate the lower-level chemists and plant officials and encourage them to confess that the two sets of tests were linked and part of a company effort to manipulate results. Eventually, Agrawal got one official alone and questioned him intently. The man begged him,「Sir, please understand what I am saying. If I ever admitted to doing trials,」another word for pretesting,「I would lose my job.」

After eight grueling days, the investigators emerged with two partial admissions and more evidence of ghastly conditions at the plant. They found bathrooms that lacked drainage piping, with urine puddled on the floor. A manager tried to argue that the stickers above the urinals meant that they were being repaired. The FDA investigators pointed out that there were no stickers and warned the man not to lie. Elsewhere, they found a worker weighing drug samples but not recording the results. The worker told the investigators that he remembered the results and would enter them at a later time.

This was a plant manifestly out of control, governed by the principles of expedience and cost-cutting. The investigators’ observations ran ninety pages. In the middle of the inspection, the managing director—the son of Wockhardt’s chairman—announced that he was departing for Switzerland. The investigators wondered whether he’d pulled money out of the company and was going to conceal it in a Swiss bank account before the stock price crashed once the FDA published its findings. Months later, India’s Securities and Exchange Board inquired into significant shares of Wockhardt that had been sold just before the FDA disclosed its previous enforcement action at Waluj. The company’s stock ultimately lost 70 percent of its value in the wake of the FDA issuing warning letters and import restrictions to the company.

By the inspection’s end, the managing director was back. At one point, he brushed by Agrawal and asked angrily,「Do you think we have quality issues?」Agrawal responded,「It’s pretty apparent.」

There were two other reasons why the experience at Wockhardt ended up shaking the inspectorate. In the middle of the inspection, Agrawal fell ill. The investigators suspected that the company had slipped tap water into his food. Baker was also particularly troubled by the managers’ through-the-looking-glass response to the findings of trial injections. Their coordinated denials infuriated him, since other companies, once caught, had admitted their guilt. But the investigators would later learn through an Indian government official that night after night, as the investigators met in Agrawal’s hotel room to plan how to build their case, company officials were listening in. They had bugged the room.

As Lal settled into his job, he recognized a bigger problem than figuring out how to engage Indian regulators in a dialogue over shared regulatory goals. The system of inspections he was expected to supervise had become so thoroughly corrupted that it was practically useless. Giving advance notice had not only encouraged rampant fakery at Indian companies but corrupted the FDA inspectorate as well. With only a skeletal staff working in the country, the FDA still had to deploy investigators from the United States for the majority of inspections. On these junkets, the investigators’ standard hotel rooms, the cost of which fell inside the per diem rates permitted by the U.S. government, would suddenly be upgraded, and the inspectors would never see a bill. Some FDA investigators brought along their spouses or partners, who would then go on shopping trips, which the companies subsidized. There were golf outings, massages, and trips to the Taj Mahal, excursions that Lal called「regulatory tourism.」The system, or lack of it, left the FDA investigators「captive and compromised,」he observed.

Lal also scrutinized the too-close relationship that had developed between the companies and FDA investigators like Mike Gavini. His investigators had witnessed Gavini in conference rooms, inviting plant officials to bring him documents, a practice that had earned him the moniker「Conference-Room Inspector.」His approach gave the companies the opportunity to fabricate documents. Investigators also heard him speak openly to plant officials on his cell phone, before and after inspections, and he sent his inspection reports to the companies for review before he submitted them officially. Gavini said that in sharing information with the companies, he achieved as much as the investigators who「keep it to themselves.」

Gavini had spent years traveling alone to Hyderabad. There, as he green-lighted plants—approving roughly 85 percent of the ones he entered that had never been exported to the U.S.—the manufacturing sector grew. Now that his colleagues were going back and uncovering fraudulent practices at those plants, they wondered if he’d done any inspecting at all. In June 2011, a whistleblower from inside Ranbaxy had e-mailed an FDA official and alleged that years earlier Gavini and, more recently, another investigator had taken favors from Ranbaxy to minimize negative findings, an allegation that Gavini denies. The whistleblower went on to suggest,「When you send inspectorss to India there should be at leaast 2 per facility and preferably with different back ground and enthicity.」Group inspections did offer a bulwark against corruption, as it was harder to bribe or co-opt multiple people at once. In one notable instance, three FDA investigators were each offered a gold coin at one manufacturing plant and all refused it. But at headquarters, some FDA officials responded to the whistleblower’s allegations by insisting that his email no longer be forwarded internally.

An FDA spokesperson later insisted,「Any allegations of improper conduct by FDA personnel are investigated.」

Some of the plants the inspectors went to were in remote towns dominated by the companies, where the hotels acted as welcoming committees and surveillance operations. The hotel staff knew who the investigators were in advance and were often familiar with the purpose of their visits. The investigators’ itineraries were shared quickly throughout the tightly wired manufacturing industry, with executives across companies communicating secretly through a chat group on WhatsApp. On one occasion, Lal got a call from Agrawal, the supervisory consumer safety officer who had been sickened during the inspection at Wockhardt’s Chikalthana plant:「‘The hotel wants to know, where is the inspector going next?’」But Lal responded,「The hotel doesn’t need to know where an officer of the U.S. government is going.」

To clean up this swamp, Lal alighted on a long-overdue solution, which he pitched to officials at FDA headquarters: eliminate the months-long advance notice of inspections and company-arranged travel plans and give only short notice—or no notice—of investigators’ arrival for all inspections in India. His proposal addressed the most glaring discrepancy between domestic and overseas inspections: the former were always unannounced, while the latter were announced weeks and even months in advance, with few exceptions.

By December 2013, the FDA signed off on Lal’s proposal, and Lal started what came to be known as the India pilot program. He directed Agrawal to take over all communications for the FDA investigators coming from the United States. This meant that the companies wouldn’t know who was about to walk through their doors or when. Lal even directed Agrawal not to tell him who he was sending where, so he couldn’t intervene, even if he’d wanted to. Agrawal went a step further. He arranged the investigators’ travel through the U.S. embassy instead of the FDA’s India office, to bypass the office staff. Even with short notice, he switched up inspection dates to give the companies less time to prepare. The India pilot program, as conceived by Lal and implemented by Agrawal, would give the FDA the most candid look yet at what was happening inside Indian plants. It had no parallel anywhere in the world: India would be the only country, other than the United States, where FDA investigators would arrive without notice.

On January 2, 2014, a Thursday, the FDA’s India office gave Ranbaxy officials short notice that investigators would be coming the following Monday to reinspect the Toansa plant, which was responsible for the glass fragments found in millions of tablets of generic Lipitor. The contamination—already the target of class-action lawsuits in the United States on behalf of consumers—had never been fully explained. Agrawal wanted the investigators to get the real picture of what was happening at the facility. Without telling the company, he decided to move the inspection to Sunday morning instead. He made plane reservations outside of the official FDA travel system. Investigators arriving unannounced on a Sunday was something no Indian drug executive would plan for or even fathom.

In the early hours of a Sunday morning, FDA investigators Peter Baker and Dipesh Shah stood outside Ranbaxy’s huge Toansa plant and showed their IDs to the guard at the security gate. From the outside, the plant looked quiet and empty, which was exactly what Baker wanted.

The men proceeded swiftly to the quality control laboratory with the hope that, at least for a while, they could move unnoticed. In the lab, they were stunned to see a hive of activity. They found dozens of workers hunched over documents, backdating them, in preparation for the investigators’ anticipated arrival the following day. On one desk, Baker found a notebook listing all the documents the workers needed to forge in anticipation of his arrival. There were Post-It notes stuck to every surface, noting what data to change. Workers were backdating stacks of partially completed forms—for employee training, laboratory analysis, cleaning records—that were supposed to have been filled out contemporaneously.

As Baker and Shah took in the operation unfolding around them, the analysts largely ignored them, figuring that they were company consultants. But as higher-ups arrived and word got out that the men were from the FDA, workers frantically stuffed documents into desk drawers. By showing up unannounced, the men saw things they never would have otherwise as they pushed through the facility: vials stuck in the back of drawers; a sample preparation room swarmed by flies because windows were stuck open with piles of trash directly outside—or, as Baker noted in his final report,「flies TNTC」(too numerous to count). The inspection resulted in a warning letter and an embargo of the plant’s drugs.

In theory, it shouldn’t have mattered whether U.S. regulators announced their inspections in advance or not. Drug manufacturers are supposed to follow good manufacturing practices all the time. Well-run plants operate in a state of continuous regulatory readiness. Compliance isn’t a part-time thing. As Lal said,「The regulations are non-negotiable. You can’t have the month of January as your good manufacturing month.」

But in India, the FDA’s new program of short- or no-notice inspections exposed widespread malfeasance that had previously been hidden. By showing up unannounced, the investigators uncovered an entire machinery that had existed for years: one dedicated not to producing perfect drugs but to producing perfect results. With advance notice and low-cost labor, the plants could make anything look like anything.「You give them a weekend, they’ll put up a building,」as one FDA investigator put it.

The investigators found a bird infestation at one sterile manufacturing site, a snake coiled next to laboratory equipment at another. At one plant, Baker went straight to the microbiology laboratory and found the facility’s paperwork for its sterility environment testing in perfect order: microbial limits testing, bacterial endotoxins, all the samples with perfect results. Yet the samples didn’t exist. They were testing nothing. The entire laboratory was a fake. Before long, the investigators uncovered a second plant that had also faked all its data proving that the plant was sterile, a「shocking」finding, as one FDA official later described it.

Under Agrawal’s direction, the investigators flagged violations at company after company, which resulted in a growing number of 483 findings and warning letters. Before long, drugs from forty-one plants in India had been restricted from the U.S. market. Outrage grew in the tight-knit industry, and U.S. embassy officials increased their scrutiny of the agency’s activities in India. One U.S. State Department official admonished Agrawal that the investigators were「acting like cowboys.」On one level, the conflict made sense. The State Department’s role was to promote American economic interests in India. The FDA investigators’ mission was to guarantee that consumers in the United States were safe. And yet the displeasure of both the U.S. and Indian governments hung over Lal’s investigators.

India’s drug manufacturers—who were adept at getting their own regulators to follow along meekly—fought back. Not only did some of their representatives publicly disparage the new inspections and claim that they sprang from anti-Indian bias. But they engaged in a dark battle of wits. Though they no longer received advance notice of inspections and who the investigators would be, they worked to find out who was coming, and when. The companies surveilled the airports and hotels. They tried to stay a step ahead of investigators at the plants. Once they got wise to the investigators’ practice of rifling through trash cans looking for records, they removed all trash from the plants.

Like most battles, this one escalated. Baker and some other investigators took to searching through areas where the plants aggregated their trash. This often involved scaling walls and leaping into dumpsters. In one dumpster, investigators unearthed heaps of complaints from patients, which had been tossed with no follow-up. As his investigators worked, Lal blocked out growing skepticism from FDA headquarters and the U.S. Embassy demands that they ease up—especially before the Indian elections, so they didn’t generate any negative press for the Indian government. Lal’s response was firm.「The inspections are the inspections. I am not going to change the inspections.」

The unannounced inspections clearly marked a new era, one that put the FDA’s investigators on a collision course not only with India’s powerful generic drug executives and the regulators most often seen as their protectors, but with their own agency as well.

India’s top drug regulator, Dr. G. N. Singh, ran the Central Drugs Standard Control Organization (CDSCO) from a run-down building fringed by sparse bushes on Kotla Road in New Delhi. Inside at the reception desk, one「E」in the RECEPTION sign dangled, despite an effort to keep it up with Scotch tape. On the second floor, the international collaboration office was frequently padlocked shut during office hours.

The CDSCO was the Indian equivalent of the FDA, and the downtrodden air of its headquarters seemed to reflect the accusation that had surrounded it for decades: that the CDSCO had done far more to protect India’s drug companies from regulation than it had to protect Indian consumers from bad drugs. Forty years of national reports had excoriated India’s drug regulators as inept, understaffed, and corrupt and called for the overhaul of the CDSCO. With the Indian market awash in poor-quality drugs, the reports had noted the agency’s paralytic inertia, yawning staff vacancies, and missing files.

The most common accusation against Singh’s agency was that his bureaucrats colluded with both drug makers and supposedly impartial medical experts. Drugs that had been banned the world over were approved by the CDSCO for Indian consumers after experts in different parts of the country submitted identically worded evaluations apparently drafted by drug companies.「The nexus between the regulators and the industry is so tight, you won’t be able to break it,」as one prominent Indian pharmaceutical journalist put it.

In January 2015, Singh agreed to a rare interview with an American journalist. In his outer office, a receptionist kept a paper logbook of visitors, where the CEOs of India’s top drug companies scribbled their names. In his small inner office, Singh remained polite and animated, if a little unhappy to be questioned. Over the next half hour, he spoke of「joining hands with other counterparts」and explained that the CDSCO would「never compromise」in the effort to protect patients. He also declared that there was「no nexus」between his agency and the drug companies he regulated. But in the next breath, he made clear why the companies had so little to fear from CDSCO regulators:「We always give them the chance to improve,」he said. As for whistleblowers, most of the time their information is「fake,」he said.

About a year earlier, he had given a more candid interview to an Indian newspaper, the Business Standard, explaining that even findings of flies in the plants and hair in pills was not reason enough for him to shut down Indian manufacturing plants.「If I have to follow U.S. standards in inspecting facilities supplying to the Indian market, we will have to shut almost all of those,」he acknowledged.

For decades, FDA officials had been struggling to negotiate agreements with foreign governments over what was called「mutual recognition」—the notion that U.S. regulators could collaborate with, and rely on, foreign regulators to make judgments about what plants to approve. But even when dealing with developed nations with similarly high regulatory standards, FDA officials battled each other over whether any country’s standards matched those of the United States. One camp within the FDA argued that the agency should be able to use the inspections of trusted foreign regulators in lieu of their own. Another camp vehemently opposed mutual recognition on the grounds that U.S. standards were superior to those of any other nation.

With the FDA struggling to enforce its own rules around the globe and unable to agree on whether any country’s regulators were as good as its own, the FDA rebranded its diplomatic strategy as「mutual reliance.」Under this strategy, regulators from different countries could engage in a discussion about health and safety, but without using each other’s inspections interchangeably. But even an agreement on mutual reliance with India seemed beyond the agency’s reach. By the time Lal started working at the FDA, Indian and U.S. regulators had spent three years trying to negotiate the most basic mutual reliance agreement. The process was so fraught that FDA officials had refused requests by their own staff to conduct certain unannounced inspections in India—with the claim that doing so would disrupt these larger negotiations.

But finally, the moment had come. Lal helped oversee the completion of the「Statement of Intent,」a four-page document stipulating that the United States and India would share information, collaborate, and include each other’s regulators at inspections, along with a disclaimer that this did not「create rights or obligations.」In February 2014, the FDA commissioner, Dr. Margaret Hamburg, traveled to India for a ten-day trip and signing ceremony in New Delhi.

The trip underscored the importance of India’s role as one of the largest pharmaceutical exporters to the United States. But the staged show of diplomacy could not conceal the ongoing battle over regulatory standards. At a private meeting, the FDA’s press officer quietly expressed anguish over a mistaken seating arrangement, when Hamburg found herself sandwiched between a Ranbaxy executive and a Wockhardt executive. The Ranbaxy executive took that moment to lobby Hamburg. The company needed money to fix its quality problems, the executive asserted, which it could get only if Hamburg lifted the import restriction on some of its products. Hamburg politely refused his plea.

No amount of photo ops could obscure the high stakes of the visit—or the gulf between U.S. and Indian standards. At the closing event of the trip, G. N. Singh shot back:「We don’t recognize and are not bound by what the U.S. is doing and is inspecting. The FDA may regulate its country, but it can’t regulate India on how India has to behave or how to deliver.」This wasn’t quite true. So long as Indian companies wanted to export drugs to the U.S. market, they were required to follow U.S. rules—and to face sanctions when they didn’t. After her trip, at Hamburg’s request, Lal drafted a proposal to rework how the FDA staffed foreign offices. He envisioned a「specialized, highly trained and qualified」workforce that would make a years-long commitment to serve overseas and become a「go-to」group for emergency assignments.

The proposal would remedy the problems behind the FDA’s anemic recruitment to foreign posts: a lack of clear「career progression and promotion opportunities.」Those who served overseas often returned to the FDA’s U.S. headquarters without a guaranteed job, and sometimes had to accept demotions. Instead, the superior training, pay, and professional pathway that Lal proposed, similar to that for State Department officers, would help cultivate more elite investigators like Peter Baker, a plan the FDA seemed certain to embrace.

As Baker’s extraordinary findings rippled through the FDA, the reaction was decidedly mixed. In March 2014, Lal and Agrawal nominated Baker for the agencywide FDA Investigator of the Year Award, which he won. One official referred to Baker and his colleagues as Lal’s「Navy Seals.」The agency’s most ardent public health advocates called Baker「noble」and「one of a kind.」But other FDA officials grew concerned that his methods were unsustainable and impossible to replicate. The agency couldn’t require its investigators to leap into dumpsters.

The mixed reaction to Baker’s findings was bigger than a dispute over methods. His findings required the FDA to punish companies and restrict the importation of their products. This put the agency in a bind. It wanted to approve more generic drug applications, reduce drug shortages, and show those numbers to Congress. Restricting companies and their drugs would have the opposite effect. Once Baker’s reports arrived at FDA headquarters, they entered a murky deliberative process clouded by politics and horse-trading that allowed companies to dodge the worst sanctions.

For example, Baker’s findings in October 2012 of serious sterility lapses at a plant run by Hospira Healthcare India in Chennai led the Division of International Drug Quality to recommend that the company receive a warning letter and have the importation of its products restricted. Instead, agency higher-ups reversed that decision, rescinded the「import alert,」and decided to send a private or「untitled」letter to the firm that would be invisible to public scrutiny. Furious, Carmelo Rosa, the head of the Division of International Drug Quality, wrote to the deputy director of CDER’s Office of Compliance:「Everyone will do as told, but unfortunately some are very upset as the entire compliance review process has been undermined.」He added that others in the division「plan to look for opportunities elsewhere as decisions are no longer based on science, policies and regulations, but politically motivated.」

The more violations Baker and his colleagues found, the more agency officials intervened. Lal, too, was amassing enemies. At the FDA India office, he viewed a group of policy analysts and some investigators as unproductive. Each one cost U.S. taxpayers roughly `$500,000` a year, once salary and various living expenses were calculated. In Lal’s view, some of these analysts did little to advance the interests of public health. Funds were being wasted. He discovered that almost `$300,000` in furniture had been ordered for an FDA outpost in Hyderabad that was never slated to open, a purchase approved by bureaucrats in Maryland. It was routine for the entire office to decamp for conferences, which were effectively paid vacations. As Lal demanded more productivity from some employees in the FDA-India office, they, in turn, filed Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC) complaints against him, alleging discrimination.

Then there was Mike Gavini. Though he was a welcome sight to most Indian pharmaceutical executives, he was disliked by his colleagues, who continued to find multiple violations at plants that he’d previously inspected and cleared. He, in turn, had nothing but scorn for the revolution that Lal was leading. He thought Lal’s investigators were unfairly treating India’s drug makers like criminals, from isolating and questioning the lowest-level workers, who couldn’t communicate well, to showing up unannounced on Sundays.「Investigators cannot become god,」he later said, adding that to investigate fraud, they「have to look at 3,000 chromatograms. Who has the energy to do that—aside from Peter Baker?」Gavini had a theory about what was happening, and it had little to do with company conduct.「People [at FDA] were getting greedy for awards,」he said. They were cracking down to advance their careers, with poor results. Ranbaxy had been the「most respected company,」as he put it. But the FDA「killed the company by drumming all the good people out of it.」

In December 2013, just as Gavini planned to relocate back to the United States, Lal sent a confidential letter to the FDA’s Office of Criminal Investigations that detailed long-held concerns about Gavini. Lal alleged that the investigator had closed-door meetings with pharmaceutical executives, sent them drafts of his inspection reports before they were officially released, and was lenient toward companies based only on a promise of improvement. He noted rumors, though there was lack of evidence, of Gavini accepting gifts.

Indian firms had clearly gotten wind of information before it had been made public, Lal said. He urged the agency not to assign Gavini to a new position that allowed him access to any「inspection-related materials」until a review of his conduct was completed. In response to these allegations, Gavini later told a journalist that he never「took any money, any payoffs, to clear a company,」adding that he「would be rich by now」if he had.

No review of Gavini took place that he is aware of. But in late April 2014, Lal was directed to return to the United States and Atul Agrawal was directed to stop running the day-to-day operations of the FDA’s India office. By June, Lal had been terminated.

Their removal came as a shock to some of Lal’s investigators, who had been summoned to New Delhi to be interviewed by the U.S. embassy’s human resources staff about office tensions. They viewed what occurred as a「coup,」orchestrated both by those in the office who hadn’t wanted to work and by the powerful generic drug lobby. They felt that they had been on the brink of changing India’s drug industry for good, progress that would now be halted without Lal.

As rumors swirled, it turned out that Lal himself had fallen under the suspicion of the FDA’s internal affairs office, which, among other things, had begun examining Lal’s transfers of money to the United States related to his ownership of property in India, which he contends that he disclosed to both the FDA and the U.S. embassy on taking the job. Lal vehemently denied any impropriety and alleged that he’d been terminated because he’d exposed incompetence and misconduct at the FDA’s India office. His dispute with the agency was resolved, he was reinstated, and he ended up retiring from the FDA in 2015.

In the murky battle over his ouster, one thing seemed clear: his departure would set back the cause of public health and drug safety for American consumers. In turn, Lal was left deeply troubled by his experience:「I see faces in the U.S. that consume these drugs. They’re not just numbers to me.」

Peter Baker remained in India, but a dark cloud hung over him, and not just fear that his life was in danger, after some of the threats he’d faced. His greater fear was for every American consumer he was there to protect.

He felt scarred from dealing with combative and nonresponsive executives who had purposely made low-quality drugs and tried to conceal the evidence with faked records. And from the plant managers he caught red-handed, who disputed that the evidence he placed in front of them even existed. The fact that they knowingly imperiled patient lives and showed no remorse seemed to Baker nothing short of evil.

Most of the plants he inspected in India made finished doses—completed capsules, pills, and tablets that were ready for patients to take. Many were aseptic plants, which meant that they had to operate with perfect sterility. Each vial represented a patient’s life. In inspection after inspection, he—and he alone—stood between the American public and potentially dangerous medicine bound for the U.S. market. The stress was unrelenting.

While he was still in New Delhi, symptoms began to overtake him. He was dizzy, suffering from anxiety, and experiencing vertigo. He went to the embassy psychiatrist, who diagnosed him with post-traumatic stress disorder. The twenty months of psychic combat had taken their toll.

Chapter 28

Standing

SEPTEMBER 17, 2014

New Delhi, India

One could hardly have blamed Dinesh Thakur if he’d taken the money he’d earned as a whistleblower and retired to enjoy time with his family. But more than a year after the U.S. government’s settlement with Ranbaxy, Thakur was waiting impatiently in the shabby outer office of Room 348-A of India’s Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. For three months, he’d called, emailed, and even sent letters by registered mail to schedule an appointment with the country’s health minister, Dr. Harsh Vardhan. When that failed, he’d turned to Sonal’s uncle, the chief minister of Chattisgarh, to arrange the meeting. Finally, the day had arrived. But thirty minutes, an hour, then two hours crept by as Vardhan tended to other matters.

In his clamor to see Vardhan, Thakur didn’t have a clear plan. He had a belief: that the campaign he’d begun when he’d first contacted the FDA nine years earlier remained unfinished. No one who worked at Ranbaxy had been prosecuted. The former executives who had overseen the fraud had fanned out to companies across the industry. Thakur’s allegations against Ranbaxy had forced the FDA to better scrutinize India’s drug companies. But what the agency uncovered—the widespread, willful manufacturing of poor-quality drugs—still persisted, largely unchecked.

To Thakur, it seemed logical that he should play some role in helping India to help itself. He knew more than almost anyone about the perilous shortcuts India’s drug companies were taking. He’d thought long and hard about possible solutions. He longed to be of use. Though not a celebrity, he had gained notoriety—as a whistleblower who’d not only made a fortune by doing the right thing but was still alive, in a country where whistleblowers often wound up dead. But not everyone saw him as a positive change agent. In the wake of the Ranbaxy settlement, pharmaceutical lobbyists had maligned him to journalists, accusing him of being「anti-national,」and suggested that his efforts reflected a「foreign hand」trying to bring down Indian companies. Thakur suspected that their accusations had made it even harder for him to get on Vardhan’s calendar.

When Thakur was finally ushered into Vardhan’s office, the minister made his lack of interest clear. Vardhan kept one eye on the news, watching reports of flooding in Kashmir, while his secretary helped him arrange travel. After more waiting, the brief meeting ended with Vardhan asking Thakur to send whatever it was he wanted to say in writing. Within a month, Thakur sent Vardhan a biting three-page letter.「I truly appreciated your attention to what I had to say while you discussed your schedule with your secretary in those five minutes,」he began. He went on to explain that, despite sanctions by international regulators, Indian drug companies had done little to change their practices or attitudes and were being egged on in their defiant stance by a regulator, the Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, which Vardhan himself had called out publicly as a「snake pit of vested interests.」

Without a new mind-set, Thakur warned,「this once prosperous industry will wither away taking with it the prospects of thousands of well paying jobs for the people of India.」The first step, he advised, would be for India to acknowledge the quality problems with some of its drugs—the same suggestion that his mentor Raj Kumar had given Ranbaxy’s executives years earlier: come clean. To that end, Thakur offered his services.「As a person of Indian origin, an avid public health worker and someone who wishes to see the pharmaceutical industry grow and prosper in India, I came to your office to offer my service, my knowledge, my experience and my commitment to help you solve this problem.」

He never received a response.

Thakur moved through the Indian bureaucracy, trying to find someone interested in reforming the drug industry. Instead, he was greeted with silence, indifference, or downright hostility. He was repeatedly told that because he was a U.S. citizen, his efforts would be viewed as anti-Indian and as a conspiracy by the West to defame the Indian pharmaceutical industry.

Even in the best circumstances, fixing anything in India was a formidable task, and Thakur was operating from a no-man’s-land familiar to many whistleblowers. No company would hire him. Drug makers viewed him as an enemy. The government wanted him to go away. He had become a professional exile. He was also essentially stateless. A naturalized American citizen and an overseas Indian citizen with a lifelong visa, he felt that he belonged to both countries and to neither. He shuttled back and forth between Sonal and the children in New Delhi and the family condo in Tampa, more out of habit than necessity. Each time he took the journey, it seemed less clear to him where he belonged—except among other whistleblowers.

Five months after the Ranbaxy settlement, Thakur had donned a dark suit and gray silk tie and stood before a crowd of hundreds at the Grand Hyatt Hotel in Washington, D.C., to receive a Whistleblower of the Year Award from the Taxpayers Against Fraud Education Fund (TAFEF). It was the same group that had first helped him find a lawyer back in 2007. He used the event to speak about the importance of role models in public life, pointing to the example that Raj Kumar had set at Ranbaxy and the fight that Debbie Robertson had waged at the FDA.

An event several weeks earlier, also organized by TAFEF, had helped Thakur feel more at home in a community he could rightfully call his own. For the first time in its history, TAFEF had invited all the whistleblowers it had helped over the years to spend a weekend together in the Florida Keys. About eighteen of them came. Some were unknown, while others were marquee names, like the financial sleuth Harry Markopolos, who had first alerted the Securities and Exchange Commission to Bernie Madoff’s Ponzi scheme. Cheryl Eckard, a former quality assurance manager at GlaxoSmithKline, helped host the event. She’d been granted `$96` million, the largest whistleblower recovery ever, for exposing nonsterile manufacturing at a GSK plant in Puerto Rico.

Patrick Burns, the acting executive director of Taxpayers Against Fraud, had been worried about getting whistleblowers together:「They don’t herd well,」he later said. But they all shared something in common. As he put it,「These are people who have chosen integrity, and they’ve paid a price for it.」The whistleblowers spent the weekend fishing and sharing meals, and they visited the house where the writer Ernest Hemingway had lived and worked. Famously, dozens of six-toed cats lived at the house, and it seemed about right that the whistleblowers, often maladapted themselves, should be visiting the polydactyl creatures.

Thakur found the weekend cathartic. He became fast friends with Cheryl Eckard, who announced delightedly to Burns,「These are my people.」As Burns later reflected:「Whistleblowers are like polar bears at a roadside zoo in Kansas. They’re pretty sure there’s another polar bear in the world, but they’ve never seen one.」

In October 2014, the Thakur family moved to a larger and grander home within the gated community of World Spa West in Gurgaon. Sonal hoped it would be a joyful place to restore her fractured family. She had taken exquisite care with the interior: light, patterned window trimmings, dark wood furnishings, and whimsy in the children’s rooms, with a princess theme for Mohavi and stars and planets for Ishan. Downstairs, a sunken living room with glass doors led into a fenced-in backyard. The Thakurs took their morning coffee together in an open family area. Thakur had set up a home theater in the basement where he could watch American movies. Next to that was his home office, where he’d hung framed articles and photos, celebrating his work as a whistleblower.

Even as they moved in, Sonal and Thakur bickered. She felt alone and unappreciated in the effort she’d made. He felt restless and ill at ease in their new world of comfort. The question of why he’d chosen to intervene at Ranbaxy hovered over their marriage.「Ranbaxy employed twenty thousand people,」Sonal argued.「Why did you have to put me and the family through all of this?」She still felt keenly her lack of agency, even in the decision to get married at all, since it had been arranged by their parents.

Thakur’s answer never changed:「I couldn’t sleep at night if I didn’t do it.」

The children softened his rough edges, but too often he broke off moments with them to retreat to his office, where he wrote blog posts about drug quality and took calls from reporters with whom he’d cultivated relationships.

He fought with the workmen who came and went at his new home and complained about the low standards that permeated the country, at one point fearing that his office equipment was in peril due to their shoddy electrical work. As he tried to explain to the workmen the right way to install the equipment, Sonal observed to a visitor,「He’s trying to do it right, the American way in India.」For years the idea of America—with its exacting standards and promise of equal justice—had sustained Thakur. He’d spent months at a time away, using FaceTime to watch his kids grow up, because he believed that the U.S. system would expose the truth and protect patients. It had worked, to a point. But now, as he looked around his reclaimed country, the low standards gnawed at him. It was not just the wiring in his own home, but the disparate impact of India’s low standards on the nation’s poorest.「You can’t even go a mile outside your house,」he said, without seeing「how hard it is to make ends meet.」The workmen laboring over his new home biked miles to work each day. If they needed medicine, they would spend a day’s wages to buy it. The fact that their medicine was of the lowest quality and was barely regulated filled him with rage.

When he looked around his privileged redoubt, he felt little satisfaction. Instead, he felt troubled and drawn to a battle that lay before him. As he tried to explain to an acquaintance,「There is some level of onus on me to try and do something with public health. I am in this position that I know things. It’s a cop-out to say it’s not my problem.」

As Thakur pursued his quest to change the generic drug industry, a band of unlikely colleagues coalesced around him. One was Dr. Harry Lever, the Cleveland Clinic cardiologist. Joe Graedon, the host of NPR’s The People’s Pharmacy, became an ally, as did Roger Bate, an economist specializing in health policy at the American Enterprise Institute, a conservative D.C. think tank. The men were joined by the Canadian lawyer and biologist Amir Attaran, who had been studying the failure of international law to address substandard medicine.

Before long, a paper published in the Journal of Clinical Lipidology caught their attention. From 2011 to 2013, one of its coauthors, Preston Mason, a Harvard-affiliated scientist, collected thirty-six samples of generic Lipitor from fifteen countries, manufactured by more than two dozen generic drug companies. When he tested the chemical composition of each, Mason was stunned by his findings: thirty-three of the samples had impurity levels high enough to render them ineffective. Even samples manufactured by the same company but sold in different countries contained widely different impurity levels—proof that some generic companies were making different versions of the same product, a high-quality drug for the West and a poor-quality one for low-income countries.

Before long, Mason had joined ranks with Thakur and his new colleagues. What started as a group of like-minded professionals connecting over email briefly became a formal advocacy group, the Safe Medicines Coalition. They tried to alert the public that America’s best public health bargain—low-cost drugs made overseas—had been dangerously compromised through negligent manufacturing and haphazard regulation.

The coalition held panel discussions, wrote editorials, aided journalists, and even spent whole days meeting with U.S. congressional staff. They organized Capitol Hill briefings that ranged from well attended to desolate. Separately, each member of the group had spent years teasing out pieces of the elaborate puzzle. At every opportunity, Thakur made the point that the incompetence and corruption of India’s regulators was not a distant problem, but one with a direct impact on the quality of U.S. drugs. Without a functioning local regulator to partner with, the FDA could get little purchase on the willful manufacturing of low-quality drugs by Indian companies.

The group’s efforts got a smattering of press coverage and even drew defensive attacks from the FDA. But with public fury fixed on ever-rising drug prices, their message—that the nation’s most affordable drugs were compromised—was unwelcome.

Thakur persisted. He contacted the nongovernmental organizations that purchased medicine in bulk for the world’s poorest patients: the Clinton Foundation, the Global Fund, the Gates Foundation, Doctors Without Borders. These organizations focused on the cost of medicine and the world’s access to it, but in Thakur’s view did not prioritize issues of quality in their purchasing. Thakur asked for meetings. Most did not respond. One operations officer at the Global Fund replied, and Thakur flew from New Delhi to Geneva at his own expense to meet with him. There, he urged the Global Fund to add language to its purchasing contracts stating that medicine had to be of a certain quality. Nothing came of the meeting.

On January 26, 2015, in New Delhi, India held its annual Republic Day Parade, a lavish event that showcased to the world the nation’s sophistication and military might. The gleaming display of missiles, tanks, Indian dancers, and military officers riding garlanded camels stretched for miles. The main message of the parade was not military, but commercial. Its centerpiece was a float bearing a spectacular metal lion made of thousands of turning cogs and gears. It bore the slogan「Make in India,」reflecting Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s signature effort to sell India as the world’s next engineering and manufacturing center. The message was aimed, in part, at the parade’s guest of honor, U.S. president Barack Obama.

The lion was the apex of a campaign that Modi had announced from the ramparts of Red Fort in New Delhi six months earlier called「Zero Defect, Zero Effect,」an effort to make the quality of India’s goods a point of patriotic pride. As Modi said at the event,「We should manufacture goods in such a way that they carry zero defect, that our exported goods are never returned to us.」By zero effect, he meant that the manufacturing should not have a negative impact on the environment. But just three days before the Republic Day Parade and the debut of the「Make in India」lion, Modi’s zero defect campaign suffered a serious blow. The European Medicines Agency, Europe’s top drug regulator, recommended suspending from the European market seven hundred drugs made by a wide array of manufacturers, which all had one thing in common. The data proving that they were bioequivalent had come from a single Indian company, GVK Biosciences, a contract research organization hired by drug makers to test their medicine on patients.

In May 2012, a former employee of GVK Biosciences had written to five inspection agencies around the world, including the U.S. FDA, alleging that the company had routinely manipulated data from patient blood tests to make the drugs appear bioequivalent. The allegations were so detailed and alarming, and implicated so many drugs on world markets, that six weeks later investigators from four regulatory agencies, including the U.S. FDA, visited the company’s clinical pharmacology unit in Hyderabad. Among them was a pioneering French investigator, Olivier LeBlaye, who, eight years earlier, had been the first to detect the fraud at Vimta Labs, the contract research organization used by Ranbaxy. His findings had sparked Dr. Kumar’s suspicions and set the Ranbaxy case in motion.

As LeBlaye inspected GVK, he suspected fraud but couldn’t prove it. Over the next two years, as he and French regulators scrutinized applications filed with GVK data, they found that electrocardiograms, which test patients’ heart rhythms, appeared identical and were likely falsified in nine different studies. LeBlaye laid out his findings in an explosive 2014 report. Though GVK officials tried to refute the allegations, European regulators sided with LeBlaye and drew an obvious conclusion: GVK’s willful falsification of some data made it impossible to trust any of its data.

As the scandal spiraled out of control, Indian government officials directed their ire not at GVK but at the whistleblower, Konduru Narayana Reddy, and ultimately at the European Union. By the time European regulators announced their decision to withdraw the seven hundred drugs, the whistleblower was sitting in a jail cell, having been accused by GVK of data theft, tampering and fabrication, breach of company trust, and threatening company staff.

The whistleblower Reddy had neither the aplomb nor the mental discipline of Dinesh Thakur. On his release, he sent meandering emails to dozens of investigators, politicians, and journalists around the world, alleging that his imprisonment had devastated his career, family, and livelihood. He had not found a protected pathway for making his allegations, in part because there wasn’t one in India. But he had not necessarily been wrong.

At the highest levels, the Indian government accused European regulators of ulterior motives. India’s top drug regulator, G. N. Singh, told an Indian newspaper there was a「bigger game being played out here」: Big Pharma companies, he claimed, had contrived the GVK incident to malign Indian generic drug makers. In this instance, the well-worn allegation made no sense. The companies hurt by the European Union’s decision were not just Indian companies but GVK’s clients around the world, the drug companies whose products had been pulled from the market. Nonetheless, the Indian government canceled upcoming negotiations with the European Union over a new free trade agreement, vowing not to reinstate talks until the ban on the drugs linked to GVK was lifted. Prime Minister Modi even personally lobbied German chancellor Angela Merkel to lift the ban.

As the conflict exploded, Thakur and his band of colleagues followed it closely.「Hold onto your hats! This is incredible,」Graedon emailed the group. Thakur was not surprised in the least. Instead of serving as a check on the pharmaceutical sector, Indian regulators were serving as its Praetorian Guard. Even less surprising was that the GVK company’s chairman, D. S. Brar, had been the managing director and CEO of Ranbaxy during its most feverish development, from 1999 through 2003. He had presided over the meeting in Boca Raton, when top company executives had decided to launch the company’s dangerous Sotret drug onto the U.S. market, despite knowing it was defective. Nonetheless, Brar, a titan of Indian industry, had emerged unscathed. He sat on corporate boards across the world, from the Wall Street investment firm Kohlberg Kravis Roberts to the Indian subsidiary of Suzuki, the Japanese car company.

Later on, GVK’s CEO, Manni Kantipudi, lamented what he viewed as the unfairness of LeBlaye’s conclusions, but did not directly deny them, pointing instead to「a difference of opinion between auditors.」By mid-2016, GVK had shut down both of its laboratory units where LeBlaye had found his evidence and quietly left the business of bioequivalence testing.

Meanwhile, as the FDA barred over three dozen Indian drug plants from shipping their medicine to the United States, India’s drug regulators defended the industry.

With few allies in India’s government, Thakur studied the country’s broken regulatory system on his own. It was governed by a seventy-year-old law that divided oversight of drug approval and manufacturing between a central authority and thirty-six state and territory regulators, each of whom pursued enforcement differently. It seemed obvious to Thakur that only a new law, or a total overhaul of the existing one, could begin to fix the problems. Decades of parliamentary standing committee and expert reports had urged the same changes, but none had been heeded.

As Thakur consulted his newfound cohorts and evaluated his resources, he came to believe that reforming India’s regulatory system might be the best way not just to save India’s industry but to improve the entire world’s drug supply. If India overhauled its own standards and enforced them, then everyone in the world who bought India’s drugs would benefit. After failing to find like-minded partners inside of India’s government, he settled on a new path to his goal: he would get there by suing India.

Three days after the Republic Day Parade, the Thakur household in Gurgaon was abuzz with preparations for a long-planned housewarming party. Electricians and gardeners came and went. Caterers and florists made deliveries. Sonal’s closest friends cycled through the house to consult on outfits and food and practice a dance they had choreographed for the event.

Sonal viewed the party as a signal to her community that, after a long absence, the Thakur family was back. She had invited a wide swath of the World Spa residents, many of them top executives at the global companies that crowded Gurgaon. But as Sonal’s hopes for the event rose, Thakur’s spirits sank. It was not simply that he despised parties and always had. He also questioned the very notion of celebrating in their bubble of good fortune when all around them lay misery. Nonetheless, Thakur donned a crisp white tunic and matching pants, known as a kameez shalwar. Sonal wore a blue-green silk sari and sheer red scarf banded in gold. The caterers set out a lavish spread. In the garden, silk pillows adorned the risers and a small band set up at one end.

Guests began to arrive. The women wore sequins, jeweled dresses, and tunics of crushed velvet, their hair done perfectly. A photographer darted among them. As the party grew and Sonal and her friends danced in a circle, a striking woman made her way through the crowd. She was poised, with dark hair and red lips, and wore an impeccable white sari, edged in gold. It was Abha Pant, Ranbaxy’s former vice president for regulatory affairs. Thakur, as was typical, had not complained when he learned that Sonal had invited her. She was their neighbor and seemed to belong in their circle as much as anyone. Yet Thakur’s information had almost led to her indictment. Now she was a guest in Thakur’s elegant home, paid for with the proceeds from his blowing the whistle on the company she’d helped to oversee. Nonetheless, they chatted cordially. She readily joined in as he gave a tour of his home to a handful of guests.

In his basement office, he stood silently as Pant studied the walls: the 2014 medal from the Association of Certified Fraud Examiners for「Choosing Truth over Self」; the picture of Thakur on the cover of Fraud magazine under the headline「Fighting a Culture of Fraud」; the framed text of his Joe A. Callaway Award for Civic Courage; a photograph of him surrounded after the settlement by jubilant lawyers from Beato’s firm, who had all autographed the edges. She took it in silently. Upstairs, as the party extended late into the night, Thakur left his guests and retreated back into the basement.

Pant remained in the living room, sipping a glass of wine and chatting with a guest as she reflected on changes in the generic drug industry. She spoke of an important shift in FDA regulations. No longer did it matter who was first, second, or third in line in the FDA parking lot. Now any company that filed on a given day, regardless of the time stamp on their application, could be considered a「first filer」and share in the profits of a drug launch. This had taken a good deal of heat out of the market, with no more pitched tents or limousine campouts. Pant observed,「Too bad all the fun is gone.」

Throughout 2015, Thakur poured his frustrated energy into building a legal case against India and its dysfunctional regulatory system. He hired a team of lawyers, who submitted well over one hundred requests for information to government agencies, using India’s「right to information」law. It was a hunt-and-peck method, but Thakur believed that it was the best way to gather irrefutable proof that India’s regulators had failed to protect citizens. The queries turned up evidence of a corrupt and threadbare regulatory system, with entirely different standards and rationales across India’s thirty-six states and territories. Dangerous or barely effective drugs were approved for no rhyme or reason. Paperwork related to controversial decisions went missing. Even when foreign regulators found dangerous conditions in India’s plants, the Indian government either ignored those findings or assailed the regulators, rather than investigate themselves.

By January 2016, his lawyers were ready. They had crafted two lengthy petitions stating that the fragmented structure of India’s drug regulation system was not just broken but unconstitutional. They filed these with the Indian Supreme Court as public interest lawsuits, a legal mechanism that allows citizens to petition the nation’s highest court on matters of social justice. Now the court would need to decide whether to grant a hearing.

As local news programs and newspapers reported on the lawsuit, Sonal begged Thakur not to proceed and accused him of doing「whatever you want, without considering the impact it has on us.」

Thakur tried to defend himself,「Somebody’s got to do it.」

Even Thakur’s son, Ishan, now a teenager, demanded,「Why are you trying to do this? You’re going out there and drawing all the wrong kinds of attention.」

Thakur not only remained undeterred but, as he worked on the case, his energy and confidence seemed to come back. His frustrations ebbed. Friends noticed that he appeared more at ease and better rested. In that time, he often thought back to his grandmother, who had drilled into him the teachings of the Bhagavad Gita, the ancient Hindu text that called for selfless action. While reading to him and his siblings at night, she had emphasized that emotions—fear, excitement, anxiety, joy—while all part of life, were transitory. One’s responsibility or duty was a better guide for deciding what actions to take.

On the morning of March 10, 2016, a Thursday, Thakur awoke in his condo in Tampa, Florida, having traveled to the United States for meetings that he could not reschedule. He made coffee and opened the patio doors to a sweeping view of the Gulf of Mexico. He loved watching the birds swoop across the water. Sometimes, early in the mornings, he could even catch a glimpse of dolphins. That evening, he dozed off watching the primary debate among Republican presidential candidates, which was broadcast from nearby Miami.

As Thursday night fell in the United States, Friday morning was beginning in New Delhi. It was a day that would shape up to be a referendum on Thakur’s ability to create even modest change in India. His lawyers would appear before a small bench of Supreme Court justices and petition them to grant a hearing in the case of Dinesh S. Thakur v. Union of India. Already, India’s chief drug regulator, G. N. Singh, whose agency was a defendant in the lawsuit, had publicly attacked Thakur, telling Reuters,「We welcome whistleblowers, we have got great respect, but their intentions should be genuine, should be nationalistic. . . . I don’t have any comment on this guy.」Still, Thakur had to admit that he felt an inkling of hope.

In New Delhi on Friday morning, Prashant Reddy, a vigorous intellectual property lawyer, ascended the steep steps of India’s Supreme Court, flanked by several other attorneys. Thakur had spared no expense. In addition to Reddy, his team included one of India’s most accomplished constitutional lawyers, senior advocate Raju Ramachandran. His lawyers would have only a brief opportunity to convince two Supreme Court justices that they should grant Thakur’s lawsuit a hearing.

Courtroom 1 was crowded. Reporters from every major Indian newspaper were there to see whether Thakur would prevail. The two black-robed justices stared down sharply at the team of lawyers as they began.

「An overseas citizen has come all the way to challenge a rule. What is your locus?」the chief justice asked.

「Locus」referred to Thakur’s「standing,」or right to bring a case—in essence, the question of where he belonged. It was an issue that the lawyers had anticipated. Ramachandran explained that the Indian constitution did not restrict the nationality of who could bring a public interest lawsuit. Nonetheless, their client paid taxes in India, and so was entitled to judicial relief.

A justice then questioned whether the suit was an effort to seek publicity:「You are coming with academic issues when people are languishing in jails. Our hands are full.」

「That is very uncharitable,」Ramachandran objected, explaining that the matters in the petition were of critical concern, life and death. Within fifteen minutes, however, it was over. The justices refused to grant a hearing.

Prashant Reddy called Thakur. It was 2:00 a.m. in Tampa when Thakur picked up. Reddy broke the devastating news: the justices had blocked them from proceeding. Thakur got up in the darkness. He made coffee and sat down at his computer. He began to type out a passionate blog post to explain why he had undertaken the lawsuit. He described India’s regulatory system as a「spectacular failure」that had done little to safeguard the public health of the nation’s and the world’s most vulnerable people. He savaged the excuses routinely offered by India’s regulators and manufacturers:

Unfortunately, no one yet has been able to point out where in Indian law does it say that it is ok to cheat, to destroy results from tests that fail, repeat tests until you get the result that you want, release substandard product knowingly to the market. . . . If the largest and most respected members of the Indian pharma industry function in this manner, what confidence do you have in the ability of the small and medium size companies to do things right? Is anyone bothered about this?

After four cups of coffee, he posted what he’d written, with the headline「A Sincere Attempt to Improve the Quality of Medicine for People around the World.」Then he called Sonal, hoping for some comfort. She was simply glad it was over and reminded him,「I told you not to do this.」He said little in response. Later, he learned that the drug industry’s main lobbying group, the Indian Pharmaceutical Alliance, was jubilant.

In the months that followed, the darkness did not lift. Two years of work and about $250,000 in legal expenses had come to naught. He could no longer explain his crusade to his wife, and often he could barely explain it to himself. His efforts had been overpowered by the forces against reform and those in favor of inertia. His family, once an emotional anchor, seemed to be coming apart. It might have been logical for him to feel some sort of regret: for taking the job at Ranbaxy, for feeling forced to make a choice over the right path to take, for becoming a whistleblower, for starting a process that had torn his family to shreds while he continued the fight long after he’d had to. But regret was never part of the heartbreak he felt. As he told an acquaintance,「Why would I regret something that I knew was true and correct and right?」As days went by, he returned again to his grandmother’s teachings—he must discharge what he viewed as his responsibility, knowing that the outcome was not entirely in his hands. This meant that he would have to accept the high court’s decision and focus instead on what to do next.

Less than two weeks later, he sent an email to the joint secretary of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, K. L. Sharma, introducing himself and, in effect, starting all over again:「From what little I have read, you seem to have a good sense of right and wrong when it comes to public health and I am writing today to seek an appointment to come and see you in Delhi at your office.」

