# Part IV Making a Case

## 0401. Out of the Shadows

OCTOBER 11, 2006

Princeton, New Jersey

On a bright, crisp morning, Debbie Robertson brought two of her colleagues to the AmeriSuites Hotel off U.S. Highway 1 to meet the man who was referred to in the agency only as「M,」short for Malvinder Singh.

It had been fourteen months since Thakur first reached out to the FDA. He’d been reliable and accurate. He did not appear to have shaded the truth or overblown his information. Nor did he seem to have any discernible ulterior motive, other than to stop his former employer from making dangerously inferior drugs. But the investigators were preparing to take a fateful step, and it was Robertson’s responsibility to confirm that her agency and U.S. prosecutors were not being led into some sort of internecine feud or ambush, and that「M」was as credible as he seemed.

As FDA agents and prosecutors prepared to serve a search warrant at Ranbaxy’s New Jersey headquarters, Thakur had become the agency’s eyes and ears. Robertson had turned to him for answers to question after question: Who sat where? How many entrances and exits? Where was the WAN access? Where were the domain controllers? Did the MS exchange email server use encryption? Could the Princeton servers be shut down remotely from India? Was there a way to prevent this once the India office got wind of the intrusion?

In his deliberate and detailed manner, Thakur helped Robertson navigate a virtual maze. He created a digital schematic of the New Jersey offices, down to the location of the bathrooms. His emails were full of minute details.

But in September 2006, after nine months of intense email contact, Robertson wrote to him with a different question: Could they meet? As she explained:

I am not trying to deceive you in any way, I just think it would be the most judicious use of time and would help clarify some issues. To be completely honest with you, the U.S. Attorney’s Office is totally supportive of this case, but because of the complexity and political ramifications, the Assistant U.S. Attorney that is prosecuting this case is being very conservative and wants to ensure we understand exactly what all the information means.

This wasn’t exactly true. So far, federal prosecutors at the Maryland U.S. Attorney’s Office barely seemed to know the case existed and certainly didn’t understand it. There was only one prosecutor assigned to it, the supervisor of the Greenbelt office, who had a full caseload and limited attention. Nonetheless, it was incumbent on Robertson to know her source and to make sure she understood his motives.

Thakur, who was now working in New Jersey, was willing to meet and said so immediately. Still, the idea concerned him. He had no legal representation and had been working with her as an「honest individual,」he wrote back.「Since this is a more formal meeting, do I need a lawyer representing me? I have to tell you that I am not all that wealthy and getting U.S. legal representation would be very prohibitively expensive and unaffordable for me.」But Robertson was reassuring on this point too. The meeting would simply be a face-to-face version of all their email contact to date.

Thakur was in the lobby of the AmeriSuites Hotel at 9:30 a.m., impeccably dressed in a blazer and slacks. There was Robertson, with dark wavy hair down to her shoulders, warm brown eyes, and a kind and practical demeanor. Her Sig Sauer .357 was holstered under a flowy blouse. With her were two other women: another agent from the Office of Criminal Investigations and the compliance officer, Karen Takahashi, who had been on the original conference call. They sat in the lobby, the fall sunshine spilling through the windows.

The group remained there for two hours as Thakur retraced the history of events inside the company, how he’d gotten the information, which U.S. products he believed were compromised, and how Ranbaxy had gamed the FDA’s previous inspections. Robertson asked most of the questions. When she asked what risks he foresaw for his family, Thakur relayed how the Singh family had hired thugs in previous disputes and how whistleblowers were typically dealt with in India.

A hush settled over the group. Though Thakur was doing everything possible to control his nerves, Robertson could see he was shaking.

By the time the trio of FDA agents left, the man they’d referred to only as「M」had come fully to life as Dinesh Thakur. But his choice of aliases had been apt. He had intuited that, in bringing Ranbaxy to justice, Malvinder Singh would become one of the biggest obstacles.

On November 29, 2006, Singh led a delegation of five top company executives, Abha Pant among them, as well as the company’s intellectual property attorney, Jay Deshmukh, Ranbaxy’s longtime outside lawyer, Kate Beardsley, and a representative from the consulting company Parexel, to FDA headquarters. They had come on a mission vital to Ranbaxy’s survival: to convince agency officials to lift their freeze on the review of drug applications from Paonta Sahib. Across a conference table, they faced ten skeptical FDA regulators, including Edwin Rivera-Martinez, who had agreed to hear out the company. Ranbaxy had asked for the meeting, and the executives had prepared for it.

Abha Pant, then Ranbaxy’s associate vice president of regulatory affairs, wearing a serious expression, began:「Thank you for the opportunity to meet.」

Malvinder Singh, gazing calmly at the regulators, explained that Ranbaxy was committed to quality manufacturing.「We take the FDA’s observations very seriously, and have taken immediate action to resolve them,」he explained.「I’ve authorized all resources to ensure that we are fully compliant.」No one spoke. He added,「Compliance is important to me personally. I am the third generation of the family to manage Ranbaxy.」He then offered,「If for any reason you feel that you’re not getting full cooperation, I would invite you to contact me personally.」

The regulators seemed skeptical as the executives took turns describing the company’s new quality improvement plans. This included hiring an outside auditing firm, Parexel, which was staffed by former FDA veterans, and a new management review committee.

The executives explained that they had added eighteen new analysts in the stability laboratory and eliminated its backlog of samples. The company had also stopped refrigerating its pending stability samples, they claimed. The consultant, Dr. Ron Tetzlaff, chimed in, explaining that his company, Parexel, had made extensive recommendations and Ranbaxy had addressed each one.

But the conversation circled back to the mysterious samples in the refrigerators. The regulators wanted to know whether any had been used to generate stability data for the U.S. market. A Ranbaxy executive denied that. The executives also pushed back against the FDA’s findings that the Sotret had lower-than-expected potency. The company had pulled samples from the market, tested them, and was unable to replicate the FDA’s findings, they claimed. This was, the Ranbaxy executives suggested, because the FDA’s testing method was less precise than their own.

The regulators looked displeased. They dug deeper. One of the more senior bureaucrats there said that the FDA wanted to see the audits done by Ranbaxy’s consultant, Parexel. The company argued that those were confidential. The two sides volleyed back and forth on the audits.

Ranbaxy’s outside lawyer, Kate Beardsley, piped up. Given the company’s concerted effort to address the FDA’s concerns and the devastating impact of the agency’s finding of Official Action Indicated, would the agency be willing to lift its hold on Ranbaxy’s applications from Paonta Sahib? The regulators’ answer was no.

Though Malvinder, at thirty-four, knew how to resolve problems in India, solving them in the United States was another matter entirely. By meeting’s end, the standoff had only intensified. Regulators would not lift the stay on applications from Paonta Sahib until the plant cleared another inspection. And they wanted to see the Parexel audits.

That was bad enough. But there was something potentially even worse that Ranbaxy executives took away from the meeting. One of them thought he’d spied Raj Kumar’s PowerPoint—the infamous Self-Assessment Report (SAR)—among a stack of documents in front of one of the regulators.

Three months earlier, Abha Pant had shared important intelligence with Jay Deshmukh and Ranbaxy’s U.S. chairman during the men’s cigarette break outside the company’s Princeton headquarters. An FDA investigator, who was Indian, had warned her confidentially that regulators had a「bombshell document」that could potentially destroy the company. At the time, Pant had no idea what document the investigator meant, but apparently it had slowed the agency’s approval of Ranbaxy’s drug applications. Deshmukh, following clues inside the company, was able to unearth the calamitous document, only to have it surface again on an FDA conference table.

Two months after the tense meeting at FDA headquarters, the agency returned to Paonta Sahib. As was customary, the inspection was announced in advance. The FDA’s ostensible purpose was to monitor the manufacture of the active ingredient pravastatin sodium, used in the generic version of Pravachol, to lower cholesterol. But inside the agency, the assignment sheet for the inspection left little doubt as to what regulators were looking for:「We continue to have concerns about the integrity of the data in the laboratory. . . . We are concerned about the deletion of records and contradictions in the account of statements between the inspection team and the firm.」The assignment also noted,「Be mindful that there may be two sets of books for [active pharmaceutical ingredients] not manufactured at Paonta Sahib.」

More telling than what the agency was looking for was the investigator they sent to look for it: Jose Hernandez, now the top compliance officer for the Baltimore District Office, and one of the investigators most likely to detect a fraud. Hernandez was the investigator who had smelled dog meat in the crab-processing plant and found the smoking pile of drug bottles in the woods behind the pharmaceutical plant in Louisiana. What would he be able to find at a plant that was on notice that the FDA was coming and whose survival depended on impressing the agency?

Hernandez arrived on January 26, 2007. A group of officials trailed him as he surveyed the plant carefully. The facilities were immaculate. The units seemed well staffed. Officials retrieved records promptly while he watched. On full alert, he studied the raw data from the pravastatin sodium batch records. Something wasn’t right, but he couldn’t put his finger on it.

He turned up an unauthorized notebook in the desk drawer of a warehouse supervisor, with notations about possible use of an active ingredient, made by a company that Ranbaxy had not registered with the FDA. It was a tantalizing clue. But company executives explained that Ranbaxy had never used that material, which was why they hadn’t reported its use to the FDA. Hernandez asked an employee to run the name of the unapproved company through the computer system, as he watched, but he could see no trace of it.

Hernandez stayed for just three and a half days, all the time the FDA gave him. Although his inspection was tough and yielded some findings, he hadn’t nailed it, despite his legendary nose for malfeasance. But he knew that something was wrong, and he vowed to find it on his next visit.

Chapter 14

「Do Not Give to FDA」

FEBRUARY 14, 2007

Princeton, New Jersey

As a hail-and-snow storm pelted the Princeton area, elaborate Valentine’s Day floral bouquets arrived for employees that morning at Ranbaxy’s U.S. corporate headquarters. Then, around 9:30 a.m., chaos erupted as federal agents, led by Debbie Robertson, swarmed the reception area. Vincent Fabiano, the vice president of global licensing, was in his office when a man he had never seen before walked in and told him,「Step away from your desk.」

「Who the hell are you?」Fabiano asked.

「I’m an FDA criminal investigator,」the man responded. Fabiano noticed the gun on the man’s hip and stepped away from his desk as directed.

On the second floor, an employee heard a voice boom behind her:「Don’t touch your computer. Don’t touch your phone. Step away from your desk.」Her first thought was that there was a bomb threat. She turned around to see FDA criminal investigators in bulletproof vests, guns strapped to their waists, surging across the floor, along with local New Jersey police.

Panic spread as the building was surrounded by police cars.「People were freaking out, crying,」a former employee recalled.「They took every computer. There were people with guns.」Employees dove under desks, not sure whether the action was an immigration raid or something else. The agents were carrying out boxes of documents and herded employees to a conference room, where they began interviewing each one: they asked about their citizenship, how long they’d worked for the company, even their height and weight. No one could use the bathroom without being escorted by a federal agent.

Jay Deshmukh, the company attorney, who was out of the office that morning, got a panicked call from his assistant, begging him to come. Deshmukh arrived to a scene of bedlam, with federal agents lugging out computers and interrogating staff. He dove in, trying to get the agents to stop interviewing employees.

Even as Deshmukh tried to restore calm, he didn’t feel at all composed, especially after he studied the search warrant. Federal prosecutors seemed to be looking for a world of incriminating material. As the news ricocheted from New Jersey to New Delhi, Ranbaxy issued a statement:「This action has come as a surprise. The company is not aware of any wrongdoing. It is cooperating fully with the officials.」

By late afternoon, traumatized employees were finally escorted from the building, past piles of drooping flowers in the reception area, which smelled like a funeral parlor. They would later call it the「Great Valentine’s Day Raid.」It lasted so long that the FDA agents who participated called it the「Valentine’s Day Massacre.」It killed their evening plans.

Federal agents emerged from the raid with around five terabytes of data—about half the contents of the print collection of the Library of Congress, they estimated. But even amid this avalanche of records, one document in particular stood out. It was the company’s own secret report on its Sotret formulation problems that Abha Pant had filed away. Investigators found it in her office with the cover page that read in bold letters,「Do Not Give to FDA.」The document made clear that the company’s defense of its Sotret drug at the FDA meeting two and a half months earlier—and its claim that regulators had tested it improperly, thus getting a bad result—had been a bald-faced lie. The company knew its drug was failing. It had known for years.

Thakur was in India during the raid, celebrating Mohavi’s first birthday. It should have been a peaceful family time, but the raid devoured his attention. Former colleagues were contacting him to explain what was happening inside the company. He’d told no one about his role in the search warrant. Ten days later, in late February, he learned what he feared most: Malvinder Singh and board chairman Tejendra Khanna had apparently held a meeting with top company executives in which they reviewed a list of people who might have given the FDA the information that had led to the raid. Thakur’s name was on it. So was that of his former boss, Raj Kumar.

What if the company tried to harm him or his family? What if something happened when he was away in the United States? He shared his fears with Robertson, who got him the name and direct contact information for the regional security officer stationed at the U.S. embassy in New Delhi. He mentioned to Sonal, as though in passing, that the FDA was reaching out to former employees and had also reached out to him. If she encountered any trouble, there was someone at the embassy who could help.

Sonal felt increasingly ill at ease. A pall hung over the family: their money worries, her husband’s preoccupation, his long absences in the United States, living in a freestanding home with a solitary guard post outside, alone with an infant and a toddler. The thought never occurred to her that her husband had played some pivotal role in the investigation of his former company. Nonetheless, she was concerned enough about the family’s safety to paste the information he’d given her on the inside of her closet door.

In the weeks after the search warrant, as the FDA’s investigators fanned out, soliciting both those who might help them and those who might implicate themselves, employees began choosing sides. Some remained loyal and hired company-paid lawyers. Ranbaxy promoted, and even relocated to India, several senior executives—including Abha Pant—thereby moving them out of easy reach of the FDA and American prosecutors. Others broke off contact with the company and cooperated with investigators. Dr. Raj Kumar received two messages at home from the company lawyer, Jay Deshmukh, urging him to call.

To Deshmukh, Kumar was a bomb that could detonate at any moment. He’d left on principle and had never agreed to remain silent. He might still have the devastating SAR that the company had worked so hard to destroy. The company’s top leadership had been shown the document, and it implicated them directly.

Kumar was「basically in hiding,」Deshmukh recalled.「We were trying to get him out of hiding. If he had good facts, we wanted to know. If he had bad facts, I wanted to know.」He added,「They were mostly bad facts.」

Kumar, who had returned to London, didn’t call Deshmukh back. He hired his own lawyer. Deshmukh, increasingly desperate to keep Kumar under wraps, called Kumar’s lawyer to offer legal assistance. He also left a chilling message:「Make sure that Raj is careful in what he tells the FDA, because he also has exposure in this case.」

Kumar read it as a clear threat.

On the morning of March 16, about one month after the search at Ranbaxy’s New Jersey headquarters, Dinesh Thakur arrived at the FDA’s Office of Criminal Investigations and was led to a conference room, where numerous investigators and prosecutors from the U.S. Attorney’s Office in the District of Maryland, whom he’d never met, were seated around the table. Robertson was there and explained that they now had enough evidence to proceed against the company.

One of the prosecutors told Thakur bluntly,「You need to get a lawyer.」

He was flabbergasted.「Why? I told you everything I know. You’re a lawyer. Isn’t it your job to protect people like me?」

「No, no, no . . . ,」the prosecutor began.

「You are telling me you verified all my allegations? I have barely worked for two years. How am I going to be able to afford a lawyer?」Thakur shot back.

「That’s not my problem,」said the prosecutor.「Now this is a formal investigation. None of the government attorneys can actually represent you.」

Robertson, noting Thakur’s distress, asked if he needed to use a restroom—which gave her the opportunity to speak with him privately in the hall. Robertson gave him contact information for an organization called the Taxpayers Against Fraud Education Fund (TAFEF), an organization that helped potential whistleblowers, and urged him to contact the group. They could help him find an attorney, she explained.

Thakur felt at his lowest ebb on the drive back to his temporary apartment in Belle Mead, New Jersey. He was seven thousand miles from his children, living on cereal and salad in a cheerless rental, while barely staying afloat financially. Now he had to find an attorney to protect him from the process he himself had set in motion. All evening he thought about the piece of paper Robertson had given him. He felt that calling the number would lead him even further away from the life he knew and expected. Yet he was already in a place he couldn’t recognize and getting in deeper by the day.

Thakur went to sleep thinking about the phone number Robertson gave him, and it was his first thought when he woke. That morning he called and left a message. By the afternoon, he had received a call back from TAFEF, which supplied him with a lawyer’s name and phone number.

At age thirty-seven, Andrew Beato was finding his way at the prominent firm of Stein, Mitchell, Muse & Cipollone LLP in Washington, D.C. The young lawyer had thinning brown hair, wore steel-rimmed glasses, and spoke in hushed tones so low that visitors had to lean forward to hear him. He typically wore a neutral expression, which did little to mask his air of intensity. When he smiled, which was infrequent, slight dimples emerged. He had been representing whistleblowers for about five years and was told by TAFEF to expect a call from a potential client.

His firm had a history of representing whistleblowers. In 2002, it had represented Cynthia Cooper, the internal auditor at WorldCom who’d uncovered an almost $4 billion accounting fraud. One of the firm’s founding partners, Jacob Stein, had represented Monica Lewinsky during the Clinton impeachment hearings. But Beato was still proving himself, and his judgments were subject to review.

It was late in the day on a Friday, and Beato was packing up to leave the office, running late (as usual) to meet his wife, who had also worked as an attorney and was now a stay-at-home mom. He had just gotten his coat on and was almost out the door when the phone rang. He was certain it was his wife, calling to ask where he was. The voicemail picked up. Instead, he heard the soft polite voice of a man with an Indian accent and a formal manner: the whistleblower.

Beato called him back and explained that he was just running out and asked for a「very short」overview. Thakur did not know where to begin, so he just started talking. As Beato listened, trying to hold on to the fragmentary pieces, he became certain that the man was crazy.

Thakur’s story sounded so implausible as to be impossible. The top executives at India’s biggest pharmaceutical company had committed intentional global fraud. The company’s drugs were being taken by U.S. consumers. And to hear the man tell it, the scope was not just limited to one manufacturing plant, or one drug. It was numerous plants and dozens of drugs being distributed around the world. The scope of the fraud the man was alleging made him sound deranged. He must not know much about how businesses operated, or even about how to make a drug, Beato figured. Fraud was typically limited and select—a rogue employee, a single incident, or a poorly managed plant. How could everything at a company be fraudulent?

It made no sense that hundreds of employees were allegedly participating in this fraud, as though it were just business as usual. That couldn’t happen. If it had, how could it have gone undetected for so long? As Thakur talked and talked, Beato grew more concerned about being late for his wife and increasingly dubious about the whistleblower.

「I have to go now,」Beato told him. He did not want to be unkind.「Why don’t you send me an email instead, with details about what happened?」

Less than twenty-four hours later, after exchanging about half a dozen emails with Dinesh Thakur, Beato had reversed his earlier view. Though he was far from clear on what had happened at Ranbaxy, he was beginning to think that some version of Thakur’s insane story just might be true.

In many ways, Beato was the perfect lawyer to make sense of the Ranbaxy case. Health care had long been his family’s business, and illness its fate. Beato had grown up in St. Louis, Missouri, the youngest of seven children. His mother died of breast cancer when he was two. His father, a dedicated internist, was the rare physician who would make house calls late into the night. Unflaggingly committed to his patients’ welfare, he was a poor businessman and refused to limit time with his patients in an era of managed care.

As some of his siblings entered health care, Beato turned to the law; he had arrived at Stein Mitchell right out of law school. At first, he represented companies in their dealings with the Federal Trade Commission. But the work left him cold. He didn’t want to get up every morning figuring out a way to get a company off the hook. How could he help people, not just corporations, from inside a corporate law firm, where he had to remain to pay off student loans? While Beato was still struggling to answer this question, his father died from a rare brain tumor. Though his father left the family with no savings, he had「wealth of character,」Beato recalled. Hundreds of his grateful patients turned out for the wake, proof that his father had lived a meaningful life dedicated to helping others.

Beato’s desire to do the same led him to a fledgling area of the law: representing whistleblowers. The practice dated back to the Civil War and fell under a part of the federal False Claims Act known as qui tam, an abbreviated Latin version of the phrase translated as「he who brings this action for the king as well as for himself.」It allowed whistleblowers to sue those defrauding the government and collect a portion of any recovered funds. The law had initially been intended to stop profiteers from selling defective supplies to the Union army. In the 1940s, after an amendment to the False Claims Act reduced the amount that a whistleblower could recoup, the law fell into disuse. In 1987, however, after reporting of widespread fraud by defense contractors (like the infamous $640 toilet seat sold to the Pentagon), the law was again amended to increase a whistleblower’s reward, creating a new incentive to report fraud, and for lawyers to take such cases.

Though Beato lost his first whistleblowing case, which involved a cardiologist doing unnecessary procedures, he saw the righting of wrongs against the people and their government as an essentially moral pursuit.

Weeks after their first conversation, Thakur sat across from Beato and several of his colleagues, including a senior partner, at the law firm’s conference table. Though smartly dressed and articulate, Thakur seemed exhausted and anxious, with dark circles beneath his eyes and sagging shoulders. Painstakingly, in a quiet voice, he began to describe the complex web of deceit that Ranbaxy had engaged in and his role in penetrating it.

Barely ten minutes into the meeting, Thakur broke down and began to sob.「What did I do?」he asked repeatedly.「What did I do? I just wanted to do the right thing.」He’d stupidly put his family in jeopardy, and now there was no going back. The FDA had started issuing subpoenas to Ranbaxy officials, and Thakur was fearful about how the company would respond. These problems were sorted out in India very differently, he explained. In considering the physical risks to Thakur and his family, the lawyers realized that they were dealing with something they had never confronted in the United States.

Thakur’s case was also inordinately complex. The lawyers had to consider the scope of the fraud. Was it even a false claims case? What violations had Ranbaxy committed, and had those materially altered the drugs? How could they prove that? And how could they best protect the man sobbing in their conference room? The case also posed a major financial risk for the firm: they could incur huge expenses, lose, and wind up with nothing. But after meeting with Thakur over the course of two days, the lawyers were almost certain, despite the daunting complications, that the firm would represent him.「This was a public health issue,」Beato recalled.「You were not going to find anyone at this firm backing down.」

In a quiet moment, Thakur asked Beato,「How do I pay you and what do I pay you? Obviously, you are not doing this for free.」

Beato’s answer came as a revelation. Thakur would pay them nothing. Instead, the firm would roll the dice on representing Thakur for free and work to help build the government’s case against Ranbaxy, with Thakur’s evidence as its primary guide. The firm would then file its findings in a confidential lawsuit against the company, which would remain under seal. While the government investigated, Thakur’s identity would remain secret. If there was a settlement, Thakur could net up to a third of the government’s recovery and Beato’s firm would get a portion of that. Under the arrangement, Thakur would become a legally protected whistleblower. Until that moment, he had not even known such a protection existed.

Chapter 15

「How Big Is the Problem?」

2007

Rockville, Maryland

As the regulatory case against Ranbaxy moved slowly through different FDA divisions, it landed on the desk of Douglas A. Campbell, a thirty-seven-year-old officer with the agency’s international compliance team. Some of his superiors found little of interest.「We don’t really think there is anything there,」one of them advised. The case looked like a protracted fight over a single manufacturing plant. Ranbaxy’s lawyers were insisting that the FDA lift its temporary ban on new applications from the Paonta Sahib plant, claiming that the company had made all needed corrections. Regulators were demanding that Ranbaxy hand over full copies of the audits done by its consultant, Parexel. Stalemates like these littered the FDA’s offices.

But as Campbell read the paperwork for the case, he became intrigued. In its responses to the FDA’s inspection findings, the company blamed most of the problems on transcription errors, lost data, or mismatched internal systems. But in excerpts from the audits conducted by Parexel, which Ranbaxy’s lawyers had refused to release in full, the consultants had noted「inconsistent entries」in some of the data from stability tests. The company was now sending corrected data. But some of the discrepancies seemed awfully big to be mere mistakes, such as a forty-five-day discrepancy as to when a test was conducted. How could the company have been so confused? Or sloppy?

Companies had to continue testing their drugs at predetermined intervals long after they launched them on the market. Every year a company had to file the test results in annual reports to the FDA. Few at the agency actually read these reports, and they piled up in back offices. But the information in the reports still needed to be true.

On July 3, 2007, Campbell drove over to the Office of Generic Drugs, which was headquartered at the Metro Park North campus, and dug out the annual reports that Ranbaxy had filed for three anti-infective drugs: fluconazole, ciprofloxacin, and efavirenz. From the reports, the company appeared to be testing the drugs at appropriate intervals. But as Campbell compared that data to the corrected data on his desk, he was startled by the differences. The annual report for fluconazole stated that Ranbaxy had conducted the three-month stability test on September 26, 2004. But in its response to the warning letter, the company stated that it had performed that same test on August 17, 2005. There was almost a year’s difference between the two dates.

To Campbell, it looked like Ranbaxy had either lost control of its manufacturing process or lost track of its lies.「Once you matched up [the dates], it was blatant,」he recalled.

His discovery mattered—at least to him. The whole reason to test drugs so frequently was to ensure that unsafe products were detected quickly and didn’t stay on the market any longer than necessary. But Campbell’s superiors didn’t seem particularly excited by the mismatch of dates. Some seemed satisfied by the company’s claims that its problems stemmed largely from「transcription errors」or simple failures to update data. Campbell didn’t buy it. This was not just「.54 vs .45 type of stuff,」as he recalled. Ranbaxy’s data was so inaccurate that he couldn’t even「find a place where the data actually meant anything.」And if the data was meaningless, then there was no proof that Ranbaxy’s drugs were safe and effective.

Doug Campbell’s boss, Edwin Rivera-Martinez, the first FDA bureaucrat to have corresponded with Thakur, sided with Campbell. He was not mollified by Ranbaxy’s claims of correction. As he wrote to a colleague in March 2007, he was convinced that the agency should continue to withhold approval of new applications from Paonta Sahib until Ranbaxy had「completely addressed all issues」from the FDA’s warning letter. As Campbell and his colleagues continued to review the documentation from Ranbaxy, each thread they pulled, each strand of testing data they followed, seemed to lead to something bigger—some new revelation that the regulators had not anticipated.

By October 2007, the company reported that its gabapentin, a sensitive drug used to treat epileptic seizures, had shown a spike in an impurity called compound A. Under good manufacturing practices, abnormal spikes or troughs in data were known as out-of-specification (OOS). The company had been required to report the gabapentin finding to the FDA within three days of discovering it, but instead it had waited four months. The regulators soon discovered that the company had not just failed to report the gabapentin impurity spike. It had failed to report irregular test results to the FDA’s New Jersey district office for six years. For any vigilant drug company with a large volume of products, such reports should have been a regular occurrence.

The company blamed the troubling lapse on a cascade of small internal problems. But when the FDA investigators went to Ranbaxy’s New Jersey headquarters, which should have been issuing the reports, they stumbled on an even bigger finding: for the 600-milligram gabapentin tablets, the company had conducted its three-, six-, and nine-month stability tests in a span of four days, and all on the same day for the 800-milligram tablets. But the test dates had been falsified and documented as if they were performed at the proper intervals.

Inside the FDA, this news was regarded as slam-dunk proof of fraud. Campbell emailed Rivera-Martinez,「Bullseye!!!」Rivera-Martinez reported the finding up the chain of command:「We hit a goldmine!」He laid out the details of the phony testing. Deb Autor, director of CDER’s Office of Compliance, responded with one word:「Wow.」

Suddenly, the lapses, irregularities, and omissions looked like something very different. Campbell scrawled in his government-issued notebook,「How Big Is the Problem?」And then,「What do they do to come into compliance?」Below this he wrote,「Present the chance to come clean or lie again. Will they continue to jerk us around?」

And below that:「Can we trust them?」

Campbell, a brawny former football player, spent eight years in the army, three on active duty. He had started his FDA career in 1998 at the Roanoke, Virginia, resident post, inspecting everything from infant formula to a tilapia aquaculture farm. By 2006, Campbell had moved to the Division of Manufacturing and Product Quality’s international compliance team, nested deep within CDER. His group performed about one hundred overseas inspections a year. Campbell himself had inspected cheese in Nicaragua and stuffed grape leaves in Greece.

Almost overnight, it seemed, the agency was hit by a wave of globalization. The number of pending inspections for Campbell’s division spiked. The foreign applications were「all stacked up in our offices,」Campbell recalled. From 2002 to 2009, the number of facilities overseas that required inspection by the FDA skyrocketed from around five hundred to over three thousand. As Campbell noted in a review,「The responsibilities related to our mission have exploded. The burden is immense, and the resources have not been readily allocated.」

As the need for inspections grew, FDA policy became an all-out scramble to keep up. At one point, Campbell wrote to a colleague to ask about the agency’s travel policy:「Do we send teams to India during Monsoon season? Do we send teams to India when it’s going to be 110+ degrees in the shade?」The answer came back:「In the past we would routinely defer travel to India during the monsoon, however, due to increase workload we no longer adhere to this.」

Before a company was cleared to manufacture a drug at a plant overseas, Campbell’s division was supposed to conduct a preapproval inspection to determine if the facility could safely and competently make the drug. But just keeping track of the facilities, and the respective codes that identified them, was a fearsome task. Were the manufacturing plants in the system those really making the drugs? Were the plants that were actually making the drugs the ones being inspected? Campbell understood that he and his colleagues held an enormous responsibility, which weighed on him as he sifted through the Ranbaxy paperwork:「[Should] we let these drugs come into the U.S. or not?」

In October, nine months after Jose Hernandez had inspected Paonta Sahib and come away with suspicions but little else, he received a remarkable email. It was from an employee, writing under the pseudonym「Sunny,」who said that he’d seen Hernandez at the plant in January and had finally summoned the courage to write. Sunny explained that Hernandez had been deceived, like so many FDA investigators before him.「At last my conscious did not allow me to keep quiet as its a matter of health of people. Ranbaxy has been hiding many facts till now.」

Sunny went on,「What you see at these locations is not the real stuff. It requires a minimum of one month to find out the real matter.」He described how the company’s top managers exerted relentless pressure on lower-level employees and forced them to clear crucial medicines—isotretinoin, gabapentin, flucanozole, metformin—for release. All had「issues but they are dispatched from the site by QA [quality assurance].」He named senior executives who had orchestrated the scheme:「Over the years they have all bluffed and fooled the FDA.」

Sunny explained that before Hernandez arrived at Paonta Sahib, a team of twenty people from research and development had descended on the plant to review and alter data.「This cleanup was done just before the FDA inspection,」he wrote.「Such thing is done routinely at all the plants at Ranbaxy.」Executives stage-managed the deceptions at the direction of top company leaders, he explained, with lower-level employees carrying out their orders under duress. To support the claim that the company had increased staffing at its stability lab, it had shifted employees from around the plant to that lab during Hernandez’s inspection.

As the whistleblowers’ revelations spread among FDA officials, regulators were surprised by Ranbaxy’s duplicity, in part because it was difficult to fathom the extent of it. The FDA was confronting a system in which data had been so artfully altered that everything seemed perfect. Until then, despite the evidence that had emerged from the search warrant, they had thought of fraud as discrete acts committed by individuals. But what if the way the entire company operated was fraudulent? How could they pierce a scheme of lies that all the employees were in on?

As the FDA descended on Ranbaxy facilities, investigators suddenly noticed everywhere the clues they had previously walked by: the use of unapproved materials; the secret changes in formulation; the use of unregistered active ingredients; the plagiarism of already published data, down to copying chromatograms, or the graphs measuring impurities from brand-name drugs, and passing them off as the company’s own. The company seemed to have sprung a leak, with at least half a dozen whistleblowers now writing in to the agency with their own examples of fraud and misconduct.

Sunny continued to write, and Hernandez soon put him in touch with Debbie Robertson, who was leading the probe at the FDA’s Office of Criminal Investigations. Sunny revealed that Ranbaxy, unable to find a legitimate fix for its troubled Sotret drug, had secretly altered the formulation while it was on the market, adding oil to the wax base to try to improve the drug’s dissolution. None of this had been reported to the FDA, making it an egregious violation. Companies were strictly prohibited from making any changes to approved formulations without the FDA’s permission.

Another whistleblower also flagged the Sotret and urged the agency to check the difference in the formulations of the drug before and after December 2006, when the switch was made.「Some scientists wanted to address the issue earlier during 2005 and early 2006 but the commercial staff was ruthless with them,」the whistleblower wrote to CDER’s ombudsman.「They really have no appreciation for the honest people. I don’t know the harm that must have been caused to U.S. users but being part of the [manufacturing] team, I thought as a good world citizen, I must bring this to your notice.」

It seemed there was almost nothing the company wouldn’t do or say, no excuse it wouldn’t make, no claim too far-fetched, to trick the agency into approving its drugs. Instead of investigating its own out-of-specification results, as required, Ranbaxy claimed that its own lab had mishandled samples, which had erroneously led to poor test results. Sometimes it seemed that Ranbaxy was better at making excuses than it was at making drugs. As one FDA regulator urged her colleagues, the company’s「discrepancies, inconsistencies, mistakes, oversights and poorly executed investigations」were not to be taken at face value. The lies were so audacious that Debbie Robertson would later say that she had never encountered anything like it:「In all my years [investigating] drug dealers, I had never had that blatant disregard for the law. They lied right to your face. I was told, it’s a cultural thing. They understood, but they knew they could get away with it.」

The only answer to this global malfeasance seemed to be global punishment. And the agency had a rarely used remedy, one of the most onerous punishments it could inflict: an Application Integrity Policy (AIP), which it had imposed on only four drug companies since the policy was first established in 1991. The AIP allowed the FDA to halt all review of a company’s applications, to be resumed only after outside auditors—hired at the company’s expense—certified that the data was legitimate. The sanction would flip the regulatory dynamic. No longer would the FDA have the burden of proving fraud if it wanted to block a Ranbaxy product. Instead, in order to get its products approved, the company would have to prove that its products weren’t fraudulent.

The agency imposed an AIP only when it had found criminality or「untrue statements of material fact,」which it clearly had in Ranbaxy’s case, or so Doug Campbell believed. He had drafted a memorandum lining up the various falsehoods that regulators had been able to document. He proposed that CDER impose the AIP for「all approved and pending applications related to Ranbaxy Laboratories Ltd.」In short, bring the hammer down on the entire company.

But as drafts circulated and meetings gave way to more meetings, Campbell began to doubt his own ability to communicate. Nothing seemed to rise to the requisite level of proof. No one seemed exactly sure if the AIP was merited or even defensible. The FDA was crowded with lawyers who seemed more intent on heading off court challenges from companies than on protecting public health. The agency’s lawyers debated the FDA’s requirements. Did it say anywhere that companies could not keep drugs in unregistered refrigerators? If the company claimed that it had lost raw data, was there any written requirement that they keep it forever?

Even the FDA’s own role seemed unclear. Was it the agency’s job to help Ranbaxy comply? Or to cut off the company for failing to do so? Shocked by the internal dithering, Campbell jotted in his notebook,「Our goal cannot be to make it easy on Ranbaxy!」But in fact, that seemed to be the case. There was intense congressional and public pressure to find more cheap drugs. Ranbaxy also played a crucial role in providing AIDS drugs to Africa under the government’s PEPFAR program. Was Ranbaxy simply too big, or too important, to fail?

The FDA’s confusion over its own enforcement mission was not the only problem.「There was some force holding this case down,」Campbell would later conclude. Did it have to do with money? With connections? With political sway? He grew suspicious, particularly when some of the FDA’s Indian employees who’d never come to his office before seemed to find any excuse to visit him.

Then there was Deb Autor. As an attorney who headed CDER’s Office of Compliance, she sat a number of levels above him in the FDA bureaucracy and oversaw the work of some four thousand employees. Before she’d joined the federal government in 1995, she’d worked for three years at the law firm that became Buc & Beardsley, which was now representing Ranbaxy. As such, she was on a first-name basis with the partner who served as Ranbaxy’s outside counsel, Kate Beardsley.

Beardsley turned to Autor as her direct conduit to the workings of the case, calling and emailing to get insight into the government’s progress and trying, whenever possible, to move forward decisions that would be helpful to her client. Autor prodded the bureaucracy at Beardsley’s behest, an effort that she viewed as part of her FDA role: to respond to lawyers whose clients had matters pending before the agency. Autor had left the firm thirteen years before the FDA’s compliance office began considering the Ranbaxy case. But to Campbell, it seemed that sometimes Autor was more focused on assisting her former boss than on helping to advance the agency’s case against Ranbaxy.

Beardsley wrote to Autor in March 2007:「Deb, I left you a phone message, but thought it would be sensible to send you an email too asking if you could give me a call about Ranbaxy. We’re still trying to sort things out on the civil side, as they are also trying to cope with the criminal side.」

Autor responded,「Hi Kate. I’m happy to call you. But it seems like I know enough about your concerns to follow-up around here first and get back to you. Okay?」

In December, in another email, Beardsley contacted her again, to explain the delays on releasing the Parexel audits in their entirety and asking that Autor call her. Two hours later, Autor told her colleagues via email,「Ranbaxy needs to think through the implications for the criminal case of providing the audits. Please consider whether you can provide Ranbaxy with Doug’s 12/6/07 list of questions in order to give them more information about what GMP issues are still troubling us.」Given the overlapping connections and bureaucratic foot-dragging, Campbell found it hard to distinguish who was working for the FDA from who was working against it. As the case became increasingly fractious, Campbell hesitated to disclose things to Autor.

Even if agency regulators had not dragged their feet, they faced a problem without an obvious solution: how could they verify that a company was making the changes it claimed to be making in factories that were over seven thousand miles away?

In an email to Robertson, the whistleblower Sunny described how Ranbaxy used hidden areas of the plant to store and cover up testing machines that were not connected to the company’s main computer network. He was referring to the crucial high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) machines, the workhorses of any good testing laboratory. The bulky machines looked like a stack of computer printers. Once a drug sample is mixed with a solvent, injected into the machine, and pressed through a column filled with granular material, the machine separates out and measures the drug’s components, including impurities. It displays them as a series of peaks on a graph called a chromatogram.

In a compliant laboratory, HPLC machines would be networked with the main computer system, making all their data visible and preserved. During a recent inspection, Sunny wrote, the unauthorized HPLC machines were kept in two ancillary labs:「Ranbaxy creates small such hidden areas where these manipulations can be done.」

Sunny estimated that some thirty products on the U.S. market did not pass specifications and advised Robertson that the agency needed to raid Paonta Sahib and Dewas, just as it had done in New Jersey, to find the evidence. He warned,「The move has already started in Ranbaxy to share such details of problematic products personally and not on emails or letters.」

But because the U.S. Attorney had no jurisdiction in India, the FDA couldn’t execute a search warrant there. Robertson felt thwarted:「People said, ‘You need to go to India.’」But her response was,「What am I going to do [over there], knock on people’s doors and hope they talk to me? I don’t have authority over in India. It’s all a voluntary, good-faith system.」The case had crashed like a wrecking ball into the overtaxed agency, exposing the fact that the FDA had no effective way to police a foreign drug company.

In November 2007, as the FDA prepared to inspect a factory at Ranbaxy’s Dewas site that made sterile injectable products to consider whether to approve its drugs for the U.S. market, Sunny emailed Robertson his most important tip yet. The FDA’s regulations required the facility to have one of the highest levels of sterility possible. But, Sunny warned Robertson,「the microbiological data is not actual and is manipulated to show less microbial counts,」adding that the plant had had several unreported sterility failures. He advised,「Be careful before approving this facility.」

A month before the FDA’s inspection, Sunny wrote again to Robertson to alert her to a cover-up in progress:「all the actual failure data of Environment monitoring and sterility failures」were being moved out of the Dewas plant to a warehouse fifteen miles away, in Raokheri. Sunny advised that those inside the plant「will try their best to confuse the auditors and they are trained for the same. People in QA have been told to keep their mouth shut about the deviations.」

The international compliance team members knew that if they wanted to get the evidence that microbial test results had been manipulated, they needed to go, unannounced, to the Raokheri warehouse. Rivera-Martinez submitted the team’s request to do that. But the answer he got back was not what he had expected. In a terse email marked「confidential,」Patricia Alcock, then deputy director in the Division of Field Investigations, wrote:「Please check your voicemail message. The warehouse is off the table.」

Alcock explained in her voicemail that an unannounced inspection could jeopardize ongoing diplomatic efforts between the FDA’s parent agency, the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS), and Indian health authorities. The two sides were negotiating a written statement of cooperation that might one day enhance the quality of FDA-regulated products made in India. To accomplish even a draft statement, HHS officials wanted to avoid angering the Indians.

Rivera-Martinez was outraged. He prepared an email to Alcock that he shared with colleagues, challenging the refusal. He stressed the seriousness of the allegations. If「true [they] raise significant questions regarding the corporation’s compliance attitude, adequacy of the firm’s quality management system, and manufacturing state of control.」He reminded Alcock that just last month, in a briefing to the staff of Senator Charles Grassley (R-IA) on what it was doing to strengthen foreign inspections, the FDA had even pledged to conduct them unannounced. In their congressional briefing, FDA officials had acknowledged that there was no legal requirement to notify foreign facilities in advance.

Rivera-Martinez’s office deemed an unannounced inspection of the warehouse to be「both warranted and necessary.」Armed with another email from Sunny about up-to-the-minute manipulations of data, Rivera-Martinez wrote to his superiors:「FYI, here’s another e-mail from the informant regarding Ranbaxy’s keen ability to manage our inspections and investigators. It’s quite clear to me that we have to consider different and bold inspection/investigative strategies and techniques in dealing with Ranbaxy to increase our chances of uncovering evidence of data falsification/manipulation. . . . That’s why I’m insisting on an unannounced inspection of the warehouse.」

Rivera-Martinez was insisting on common sense. But this time he heard back from the deputy associate commissioner for compliance policy in the Regulatory Affairs Office, who also nixed the warehouse inspection. The deputy explained the thinking of senior FDA officials:「We agreed that any unannounced inspections in a foreign country [need] to be well thought through and planned with all parties to ensure investigator safety and that we minimize the potential that any adverse international incident occurs. Since no such planning had taken place by the time the inspection team left, we agreed that no unannounced inspection would take place this trip.」So because of the risk of international conflict that might scuttle a diplomatic effort, the FDA would not fully and unreservedly investigate foreign facilities that presented potential threats to U.S. public health. The needs of patients came last.

Instead, while at Dewas, the investigators requested a visit to the Raokheri warehouse. They were taken there the following day and spent eight hours rummaging through drawers and boxes. As Alcock informed Rivera-Martinez, they「didn’t find anything pertinent or as described by the informant.」The whistleblower Sunny later told Robertson that「just before the inspection somebody inside alerted to move unaccounted material from the Raokheri warehouse.」

But the company could not conceal a more startling problem at the supposedly sterile facility. As Alcock conveyed to her colleagues,「The building . . . is surrounded by pig farms. [The investigator also observed] a lack of instructions/procedures advising personnel to wash their hands/feet before entering the sterile core. (Many of the workers wear sandals. . . . There are also a tremendous amount of pigs scattered on/near the facility???).」

The FDA did not approve the sterile facility. But as agency regulators continued to approve other Ranbaxy applications, their permissive approach seemed increasingly unsustainable. Toward the end of 2007, Deb Autor learned that a different federal agency, the U.S. Agency for International Development (USAID), was considering terminating Ranbaxy as a provider of low-cost drugs to Africa. Instead of applauding the aggressive action, Autor expressed concern that such a clear rebuke of the company would make the FDA’s regulators look bad. It would raise「questions about why FDA has not shut down Ranbaxy,」she warned her bosses. She offered to take up this question in person or by phone. One of those copied on the email advised colleagues,「Keep this information to yourselves.」

On December 12, 2007, USAID sent a stern letter to Ranbaxy. It accused the company of delaying reporting negative test results to the FDA.「I am very troubled by this apparent lack of business integrity and honesty by a company performing on a subcontract funded by the U.S. Government,」the letter stated. It was signed by the acting director of the Office of Acquisition and Assistance and stated that USAID was considering suspending or debarring Ranbaxy from the program. By contrast, the FDA seemed more comfortable to continue its accustomed approach:「Regulators were perfectly happy to stall and stall,」Campbell recalled.

By early 2008, Ranbaxy had submitted an application for approval of a plant called Batamandi, in Himachal Pradesh. It proposed to make sensitive drugs there, including tacrolimus, an immunosuppressant used by transplant patients to prevent organ rejection. The application caused immediate suspicion among Campbell and his colleagues. Batamandi was close enough to Paonta Sahib to possibly be a part of it. Was Ranbaxy trying to pass off a part of Paonta Sahib as a new plant as a way to evade the agency’s restrictions there?

As was customary, the agency ordered a preapproval inspection for the manufacture of tacrolimus at the Batamandi facility. But there was nothing ordinary about the assignment. Jose Hernandez was tapped to go. In early March, he arrived at Batamandi, armed with his「broad scope of thinking,」as he liked to put it, and a determination not to be fooled again. As was typical, Hernandez began his inspection outside, taking in the grounds. By standing at the edge of the property, he could see the Paonta Sahib plant, about two and a half miles away. He noted an eight-foot-high fence that surrounded almost all of the Batamandi plant. There was only one entryway, secured by a well-staffed guard post. The guards there, former military policemen, seemed proud to confirm that they logged all employees and visitors in and out through the gate. No one got past them.

This gave Hernandez the opportunity he needed. By examining checkpoint records at the gate, he learned that the supervisors who had signed off as present for the manufacturing of key tacrolimus batches had not actually been at the plant on those days. They had not signed in to the security gate logs. The dates, times, and signatures of the batch records were fake and had been filled in after the fact. One evening at his hotel, where other Ranbaxy executives who had flown in for his inspection were also staying, Hernandez cornered one of them and said,「When Catholics do something bad, they go to the priest and confess. Now, think that I am the priest and take this opportunity to tell me who was involved in creating the fraudulent data.」

They did not confess then and there. But by the end of his inspection, while at the closeout meeting at the plant, the managers essentially admitted that the company was trying to rush Batamandi into operation to circumvent the FDA’s restrictions on Paonta Sahib.

Hernandez explained to Ranbaxy’s senior executives that he was planning to recommend against approving the plant. The company’s senior vice president for global manufacturing, who’d arrived to oversee the inspection, took him aside. He became「agitated and desperate,」Hernandez documented. The vice president admitted that the plant’s construction had been rushed and mistakes had been made. Over and over, the man pledged to correct anything Hernandez wanted, but begged the investigator not to use the word「falsified」in his report.

The FDA refused to certify Batamandi as a separate plant, and Ranbaxy withdrew its tacrolimus application. It was yet another round in a global game of whack-a-mole. Each time the FDA found fraud inside Ranbaxy, it responded with a small regulatory restriction, only to find fraud pop up somewhere else. The agency had done nothing yet to clamp down on Ranbaxy’s entire method of operating. But the game was about to change.

Chapter 16

Diamond and Ruby

OCTOBER 2007

New Delhi, India

Malvinder Singh’s year had gotten off to a bad start. Unlike his father—a visionary who built institutions and legacies—Singh saw his primary role as creating value for shareholders. As he told India’s business press,「I am an entrepreneur at heart and value-creation is the ultimate objective of any true-blue entrepreneur.」

But creating lasting value was not as easy as it seemed. When he took over the company in 2006, the young CEO quickly ran through his MBA playbook—aggressively seeking acquisitions and alliances. But even though he succeeded in generating buzz, Ranbaxy’s bottom line was「sagging,」according to AsiaMoney. Ranbaxy had to withdraw its bid to buy Germany’s biggest generic drug company. Then there was the FDA. In his view, the American regulators were a sour lot—unmoved by his pledge of reform and the company’s face-saving gestures.

In Malvinder’s India, you could almost always make a problem go away, whether through strategic payments or the threat of force. Just five months earlier, Malvinder’s brother, Shivinder, blocked a high-profile cardiac surgeon who opposed him in a business deal from reentering a New Delhi hospital the Singh family owned. The surgeon arrived at work to encounter almost one hundred policemen and a full battalion of Rapid Action Force servicemen, armed with tear gas and a water tanker used for riot control.

But in the United States, there was no vigilante army to summon and the FDA was refusing to budge. As Ranbaxy’s largest shareholders, the Singh brothers found that the problems had begun to take a toll on their bottom line. Amid these concerns, Malvinder paid close attention to an intriguing message from one of the company’s advisers in New York. A fellow named Tsutomu Une, from the Japanese drug company Daiichi Sankyo, wanted to speak to him about a strategic partnership. Malvinder sensed opportunity.

In Tokyo, four thousand miles away from New Delhi, Dr. Une looked around the world for new revenue streams. As senior executive officer of global corporate strategy for Daiichi Sankyo, Japan’s second-largest drug company, Une wanted to penetrate far-flung markets, like India and eastern Europe, in which his company had never set foot. He needed a low-cost, big-volume partner. His eye kept landing on Ranbaxy.

Une, a sixty-year-old microbiologist, had come up through the ranks of pharmaceutical innovation. He had been at Daiichi Pharmaceutical Company for more than thirty years and continued his rise after the company’s 2005 merger with the Sankyo Company. Gentlemanly and formal, Une maintained a careful journal of his work life.

More than other countries, Japan was a brand-loving society that viewed generics as untrustworthy. The nation was devoted to quality and cleanliness. Though once scorned for poor quality, its modern-day pharmaceutical industry enjoyed a worldwide reputation as a leader in quality controls. The pills even had to be white, or patients regarded them with suspicion. Though Une was a product of that trademark caution, he recognized that the insular nature of Japan’s drug industry and its focus on high-cost research had led to a slowdown in growth.

From his perspective, Ranbaxy—with manufacturing plants in eleven countries and sales in 125 countries—was enticing. It had numerous first-to-file drug applications pending in the United States, including for generic Lipitor, which would be the most lucrative generic drug launch in history. Daiichi Sankyo wanted a stable of low-cost drug products to help create a flow of revenue in between the blockbusters. To that end, Ranbaxy might be the perfect partner for an alliance. If an acquisition could be done quickly, it could help prop up Daiichi Sankyo’s battered share price before the next quarterly investors’ meeting.

In Japan’s boardrooms, decision-making tended to be consensus-driven, so Une would have to convince his colleagues. But as Daiichi Sankyo’s president, Takashi Shoda, had told his colleagues,「India will be the trump card allowing a Japanese pharmaceutical firm to go global.」The idea was in the air.

Une, sensitive to cultural implications, knew the matter would be a delicate one. Ranbaxy was not just any Indian company. It was a cultural institution, built by the eminent Singh family and handed down for three generations. It was now in the hands of a Singh scion, an American-educated MBA little more than half his age. But Une’s standing was high within Daiichi Sankyo, his vision respected, and his business acumen proven. And so, in early October 2007, he made his first approach, contacting one of Ranbaxy’s external advisers in New York.

Within three weeks of their first conversation, Une and Malvinder met. Une, his silver hair combed neatly back, spoke in thickly accented English. Malvinder—with his polished diction, bespoke suit, and elegant turban with matching handkerchief—was the picture of composure. Their negotiations moved swiftly, and the men scheduled a follow-up meeting in New Delhi. Une and Malvinder proceeded with utmost secrecy, using the code names「Diamond」for Daiichi Sankyo and「Ruby」for Ranbaxy in internal reports and correspondence. They also agreed on a cover story for their upcoming meetings. If the press inquired, they would claim to be in discussion about a contract manufacturing agreement. Those were a dime a dozen and wouldn’t attract the scrutiny of the business press.

Little more than four months after Une’s first contact, conversations had escalated well beyond a strategic partnership to negotiations over an outright sale. The Japanese microbiologist and the young Indian billionaire were haggling over share price and terms. But Une was concerned by the regulatory cloud that hovered over Ranbaxy. In emails back and forth, Une, guided by his lawyers, kept pressing Ranbaxy to make typical warranties, representations, and indemnities explicit, which would allow Daiichi Sankyo to sue for breach of contract if Ranbaxy’s financial health was not as Malvinder warranted. Malvinder kept deflecting his requests. Finally, on a call, Une told him,「My colleagues are frustrated by your ‘Don’t worry’ type answers to our questions.」In a second call the same day, Malvinder, in his melodic and steady voice, moved to reassure the scientist:「There is no fear or fault in Ruby.」

But Une had unresolved questions. It was public knowledge that federal agents had raided Ranbaxy’s U.S. headquarters in February and issued warning letters against two of its key plants, Paonta Sahib and Dewas. But no one knew how serious the investigation was, or how deep the company’s potential liability went. Malvinder had asked Une on the phone,「What are your concerns?」

Une could only guess what prosecutors working for the formidable U.S. Justice Department and the world’s toughest regulators at the FDA were probing. It would be the job of his advisers to find out. In less than a month, Malvinder and Une met secretly in Delhi, this time with their lawyers and a small coterie of top executives. Une made clear that whatever lay at the bottom of the various U.S. investigations into the company would be critical to whether Daiichi Sankyo moved ahead. Malvinder appeared unruffled and pledged help and candor with the process. He agreed to set up a due diligence meeting in which all documents relevant to the investigations would be disclosed to Daiichi Sankyo.

The young CEO then appeared to take Une into his confidence and explained what was really driving the investigations: Pfizer was retaliating against Ranbaxy for having prevailed in the Lipitor patent litigation and, through sleight-of-hand, had unleashed the investigators. As Une considered this explanation, Ranbaxy’s intellectual property lawyer, Jay Deshmukh, among a handful of top advisers present, sat stone-faced and silent.

Despite Malvinder’s blithe assurance that there was no「fear or fault」in Ranbaxy, the company was essentially a powder keg. As Malvinder well knew, the company’s dark secrets had been memorialized in the potent document known inside the company as the Self-Assessment Report (SAR), the blistering PowerPoint that Rajinder Kumar had shown to the board.

Had the document been destroyed, Malvinder wouldn’t have been in this position. But he believed that the U.S. government had it, and it had served as a magnet for prosecutors and regulators. Ranbaxy’s external lawyers had made it vividly clear to Malvinder that the company would not move past its troubles with the U.S. government until it righted the wrongs described in the SAR. And though the SAR did not address the authenticity of the data used for U.S. drugs, government prosecutors had quite logically inferred that, if so many of the company’s drugs were fraudulent, there was no reason to trust any of them.

Just weeks after Malvinder’s disastrous meeting with the FDA, lawyer Kate Beardsley, who had helped Ranbaxy navigate the FDA for years, got on a plane to New Delhi. She spoke with Malvinder specifically about the SAR. Until the company dealt with it, she told him, its FDA problems were likely to persist. There was only one way forward: to withdraw each drug and each dossier flagged as having false data and then retest and resubmit them, just as Kumar had proposed two years earlier at the ill-fated board meeting. The situation required global remediation, Beardsley told him.

If there was any lingering doubt as to whether the government had the SAR, the February 2007 search warrant in New Jersey erased it. Ranbaxy’s lawyers learned that it had been in the trove of documents that FDA agents hauled from Abha Pant’s office. The next month, in a meeting near Heathrow Airport in London, Beardsley again raised the topic of the documents, this time with Deshmukh and former CEO Brian Tempest, who remained a company adviser. A new outside attorney, Christopher Mead, a partner with London & Mead, which had been hired by Ranbaxy to deal with the growing Justice Department investigation, also attended the meeting. A veteran former prosecutor, Mead had immediately understood the significance of the SAR. Not only had this confession of fraud by executives in the company probably ignited the Justice Department investigation, but the document also opened the door to prosecution of individual company executives. The alarm was such that, in a phone call, Deshmukh warned Tempest against traveling to the United States, where he could be subject to arrest.

In June 2007, Mead sat down with Malvinder and told him that he’d gotten two letters from the Justice Department, asking for documents related to the SAR. Mead was nothing if not emphatic. The SAR was so serious and reflected such a culture of corruption that the company had to address the concerns it raised head on. Until it did so, the government was unlikely to relent.

But as Ranbaxy and Daiichi Sankyo got closer to a deal, Malvinder had a different concern about the SAR. It had attracted regulators and prosecutors but would almost certainly repel the Japanese and jeopardize the deal with Daiichi Sankyo. He would need a way to make the documents vanish in plain sight. Malvinder’s trusted deputies fabricated the minutes of the 2004 board meeting, so they bore no reference to Kumar’s presentation.

Malvinder also managed to wear Une down in his insistence on contractual safeguards. With the argument that contracts were usually different in India, he’d gotten Une to accept a single representation and warranty that Ranbaxy was as sound an investment as he’d portrayed. That guarantee would come from Ranbaxy, not from Malvinder personally. However, Une had been warned by advisers not to buy the company without proper due diligence regarding the U.S. government’s investigations. It was advice he intended to heed.

In general, Une’s approach, as a Daiichi Sankyo lawyer summarized it to a consultant at the time, was,「if we show our best efforts, sincerity and reasonableness on the coming negotiation, they also will show their best efforts, sincerity and reasonableness to us.」The consultant wrote back,「We have been too trusting of Ruby, and they have taken full advantage of that.」Jay Deshmukh would later observe that the two cultures were like「oil and water.」Indians succeeded in business by being「ultra-aggressive,」he said.「Ethics are not important.」By contrast, the Japanese were「very trusting. Babes in the woods.」

Inside Ranbaxy, Malvinder put Deshmukh in charge of the due diligence process. As they prepared for a major meeting with Daiichi Sankyo, Singh gave him explicit instructions: do not mention the SAR or any of its repercussions. Deshmukh balked, but ultimately made clear that he would follow orders, and he advised the external lawyers not to mention the SAR to Daiichi Sankyo under any circumstance. Other Ranbaxy executives were instructed not to speak with Daiichi Sankyo executives at all, but to communicate with them through Malvinder’s executive assistant. Malvinder would later deny any misrepresentation or concealment of information from Daiichi Sankyo, saying that all relevant information about Ranbaxy was in the public domain.

Though Abha Pant was tapped to speak about the FDA warning letters at the upcoming meeting, Malvinder’s personal attorney advised her to say nothing about the SAR. This lockdown was possible, in part, because Malvinder had surrounded himself with a handpicked group of loyalists who had ties to his family and to the spiritual organization so interwoven in the family’s affairs. They sat in on almost every early phone call Malvinder had with Une.

On May 26, 2008, Malvinder, Deshmukh, and Une met in New Delhi, accompanied by top executives and lawyers from both sides. To ensure that Deshmukh wouldn’t waver in his pledge, he was given a script that Malvinder had signed off on to follow throughout the meeting. It made no mention of the SAR or its connection to the government investigations. The script put Deshmukh in a box. He could only tell Daiichi Sankyo that the FDA and DOJ investigations were routine and dealt with different, unrelated issues and that the allegations Ranbaxy faced were unlikely to result in major liability.

By agreement, Ranbaxy had set up a data room where Daiichi Sankyo’s lawyers could review documents that included communications from U.S. prosecutors. But documents that mentioned the SAR had been removed from the stacks of materials. The two letters from the Justice Department asking for related documents had also been excluded.

Weeks later, in an executive meeting with Malvinder in London, Deshmukh was thunderstruck to learn that the Japanese were to become Ranbaxy’s majority shareholder. Until then, he believed the two companies were negotiating a manufacturing agreement, rather than an outright sale. He’d been kept in the dark. Once Deshmukh understood that an acquisition was being negotiated, suppressing information not only felt unjust. It seemed fraudulent.

Afterward, Deshmukh sought out Kate Beardsley for legal advice about his responsibility for deliberately withholding information from Daiichi Sankyo. Distraught, he told her that he was suffering a「crisis of conscience.」Beardsley said that she couldn’t advise Deshmukh personally, as her client was Ranbaxy. But Malvinder’s directive to withhold information about the SAR was so serious that she consulted with her law partner about whether it was even possible to continue representing Ranbaxy. They concluded that if Daiichi Sankyo contacted them with questions about the government’s investigation, they would have to resign rather than lie.

But Daiichi Sankyo never contacted them. Within weeks, the Japanese company had signed the agreement to become Ranbaxy’s majority shareholder and retain Malvinder as CEO for five years. At a press conference in June 2008, Malvinder stunned the Indian business world by announcing that he and his brother, Shivinder, had agreed to sell their 34 percent stake in Ranbaxy to the Japanese for an astonishing $2 billion. The Japanese would then purchase additional shares to bring their controlling ownership to just over 50 percent of the company.

Malvinder called the sale an「emotional decision,」but one that would enhance the value of both companies and leave Ranbaxy debt-free. Just because he was no longer a shareholder, he said,「the visions, the dreams, the aspirations, none of that is going to change.」He faced fierce criticism that he’d betrayed national entrepreneurial pride by selling Ranbaxy to the Japanese.「Ranbaxy was the all-conquering Indian hero and should have been the last man standing instead of being the first to capitulate,」a former Ranbaxy executive told the Economic Times.

Malvinder had capitulated just in time.

One month later, on July 3, 2008, the Maryland U.S. Attorney filed an explosive motion in district court, shocking both FDA bureaucrats and Ranbaxy executives. The motion, which was public, demanded that the court force Ranbaxy to turn over the Parexel audits, which had been subpoenaed seven months earlier. In one sense, the motion was procedural. But the language was a knockout punch. The motion described a「pattern of systemic fraudulent conduct by the company」and noted that ongoing violations by Ranbaxy「continue to result in the introduction of adulterated and misbranded products into interstate commerce with the intent to defraud or mislead.」

Inside the FDA, the mood among frustrated bureaucrats was jubilant. Even if their own agency hadn’t yet taken action, prosecutors had. Edwin Rivera-Martinez emailed his team members:「This is the best news I’ve received in a long time! Finally, after waiting for so long and so much time and effort dedicated to this case . . . we are seeing the fruits of our efforts.」The usually understated bureaucrat signed off:「Enjoy the rest of your weekend if you can calm down.」

The motion set off a firestorm of questions from public health experts, congressional investigators, and foreign regulators, who were suddenly reevaluating some of their own Ranbaxy inspections. Even Ranbaxy’s own consultants were confounded. If the FDA had so clearly identified a company-wide culture of corruption, why did it continue to approve the company’s applications, product by product, and the company’s manufacturing plants, site by site?

Deb Autor, the director of CDER’s compliance office, sent around a blog post written by a former FDA employee with thirty-eight years of experience at the agency, headlined,「It’s Time for FDA to Block All Ranbaxy Products.」The post stated,「Until [Ranbaxy] can prove to FDA that these record problems are not part of a corporate culture, I feel that FDA should just inform Ranbaxy that all of their products offered entry into the U.S., regardless of plant involved in the actual production, will be refused entry.」It’s what the FDA compliance officer Doug Campbell had been saying all along. The post concluded that it would be a「start for the FDA toward regarding the American consumer as a ‘customer’ deserving protection, rather than continuing to reserve this policy for industry.」Autor appended a terse note, written in bold, to her email:「Further discussion if any should be in person, not by e-mail.」

Ultimately, it was neither the risk to public health nor the company’s ongoing obstruction that motivated the agency to act. Two weeks after prosecutors filed their motion, an email with the subject line「Heads Up xx」landed in the inboxes of senior FDA officials. It came from an attorney in the chief counsel’s office and noted:「I have been advised that Congress may soon be vigorously inquiring why FDA did not seek to bar the importation of Ranbaxy drugs made in India that are alleged to have been made under fraudulent conditions.」

The prospect of congressional questions set off alarm bells within the agency. Doug Campbell was in Poland, inspecting a drug plant, when his cell phone rang. It was Deb Autor. She had never contacted him directly before. Now she was focused on guarding the agency’s flanks and wanted to know:「What are we doing with Ranbaxy?」Campbell told Autor the truth:「We’re not doing anything.」Three days later, Campbell got new marching orders from an official by email:「Be prepared. Ranbaxy is your only priority right now.」

As though in preparation for questions from Congress, an internal summary of steps the agency had taken related to Ranbaxy began circulating among top officials. It played down the findings at Paonta Sahib, explaining that they did not justify restricting the importation of products made there. The summary noted that the agency had refused to approve some of Ranbaxy’s applications—but made no mention of the twenty-seven others it had approved since Thakur had first reported the fraud in 2005. It also noted that five inspections「have not found evidence to substantiate the informant allegations relating to bioequivalence testing,」a shading of the truth at best.

The memo concluded that appropriate next steps had been a difficult judgment call and had triggered scientific disagreement within CDER. This made it sound as though the agency had been actively wrestling with the case as a prelude to taking action, rather than simply sleeping on it. But in its own ponderous manner—facing the specter of congressional oversight—the agency was finally gearing up for action.

Chapter 17

「You Just Don’t Get It」

JULY 2008

New Delhi, India

As the Maryland U.S. Attorney’s Office filed its motion, alleging a「pattern of systemic fraudulent conduct,」Malvinder Singh faced his sharpest crisis yet. Questions loomed about Ranbaxy’s integrity, and the company’s stock price fell. The deal with Daiichi Sankyo had not been completed yet, and Malvinder needed a way to salvage it.

In a cagey call with reporters, Malvinder went public with his allegations of a conspiracy that he had previously shared with Tsutomu Une.「People are trying to create confusion and obviously somebody is trying to bring our price down so that they can [buy] at a lower price,」he told investors.「A multinational [company] and a leading Indian company are working in concert to bring our share price down,」he claimed, without offering any proof. Malvinder said Daiichi Sankyo was「aware of these issues while conducting due diligence. There is no change in the deal and there is no exit clause in it.」

Inside Ranbaxy, the principals huddled. They attended a meeting in Malvinder’s office marked「VIMP」(very important) in their calendars. The first agenda item:「Self assessment.」Almost everything aside from the SAR could be explained away, but that document alone would expose Malvinder’s claims as a lie.

The sense of crisis, and the phalanx of outside law firms to help manage it, was growing by the day. In late July 2008, company lawyer Jay Deshmukh traveled with the outside lawyer Chris Mead to a meeting at Ranbaxy headquarters that included Malvinder and other senior management, as well as two other external lawyers: Beardsley, the company’s longtime FDA lawyer, and Raymond Shepherd from Venable, brought in to deal with the new problem of scrutiny from the U.S. Congress. They needed a strategy to respond to the increasing tide of problems. In the car on the way to the meeting, Deshmukh confided in Mead that Daiichi Sankyo had not been told about the SAR because Malvinder would not allow it. Mead was furious.

At the meeting, the SAR again dominated the conversation. It became infuriatingly clear to Mead that the company had done little to respond to the allegations laid out in the SAR. He had learned, from a report Pant created, that the company continued to ship over sixty products that had been approved based on fake data. He was so frustrated that he pounded his fist on the conference table and shouted at Malvinder,「You just don’t get it!」He insisted that Ranbaxy stop shipping such products immediately, advice that Beardsley seconded. Mead explained that until the company fully dealt with the SAR, the government would not yield. Malvinder appeared to acquiesce and agreed to withdraw all affected products from global markets. Both Mead and Deshmukh urged him to disclose the SAR to Daiichi Sankyo. Malvinder responded,「I will deal with the Japanese.」

Among Ranbaxy executives, this came to be known as the「You just don’t get it」meeting. Malvinder did take one clear step after that meeting: he let go Mead’s firm and brought in another to deal with the Justice Department.

As Ranbaxy executives battled their own lawyers, FDA officials were preparing to take action. On September 16, 2008, just two months after prosecutors filed their motion, the agency announced that it was stopping the import of more than thirty drugs from two Ranbaxy plants, Dewas and Paonta Sahib. It also unveiled new warning letters for each plant.「With this action we are sending a clear signal that drug products intended for use by American consumers must meet our standards of safety and quality,」said Dr. Janet Woodcock, CDER’s director, in a press release.

As the compliance staff paused for a moment to celebrate, FDA officials held a media briefing to explain their new get-tough stance toward Ranbaxy. They were blocking the importation of the drugs from two of Ranbaxy’s plants. However, they were not demanding that the drugs be recalled from U.S. pharmacy shelves. Characterizing the action against Ranbaxy as「proactive,」Deb Autor told reporters,「FDA has no reason to believe the drugs from these two plants already in the U.S. drug supply pose a safety problem.」Stating that FDA tests showed that Ranbaxy drugs met specifications, she added,「FDA has no evidence that these Ranbaxy products are actually defective. But the manufacturing process and control problems the FDA has found could impact product and for this reason FDA has taken these proactive steps.」

Autor had served as an agency representative. Her statements, as she later said,「were simply a reiteration of FDA’s official position, which was, as always, the result of a lengthy internal deliberation process involving many people throughout the organization.」Nonetheless, her statements sparked fury inside the agency. The criminal investigators and compliance staff convened to discuss their veracity and impact. The FDA knew that two of Ranbaxy’s drugs, Sotret and gabapentin, had failed quality tests and posed a potential danger to patients. If the drugs were not defective, then what was the problem, and what leverage did the FDA have? Campbell didn’t know what to think.「Apparently there’s an idea, we don’t want to create a panic. It’s a lawyer thing,」he said.「Lawyers don’t have the same kind of conscience.」

The statements had floated the company a life raft and made the work of agency investigators that much harder. For years to come, Ranbaxy would invoke them in its efforts to fend off the FDA. In the short term, however, the FDA’s announcement of import restrictions and warning letters triggered a crisis inside the company that played out on three continents.

On a conference call the day after the FDA’s get-tough announcement, Malvinder Singh continued to insist to Une that Ranbaxy had done nothing wrong. He told Une that he was「shocked」by the developments. He claimed that Ranbaxy had been fully cooperative and there was「no sign or omen」that the FDA had been dissatisfied with its efforts.

Remarkably, despite every warning sign, the deal between the two companies remained on track. Ranbaxy agreed to turn over to the Justice Department the audits prepared by its consultant, Parexel, in their entirety, and the U.S. government withdrew its motion to enforce the subpoena. Une continued to express confidence in Malvinder, noting in his journal,「[Malav-San] responded to our requests in good faith on each matter and prepared accordingly. Things have started to work well.」He even counseled himself to be culturally sensitive and not to harbor negative thoughts. In one entry, he wrote,「Malav-San’s response to requests in connection with the FDA are slow. I understand that it is in the middle of the most celebrated festival but . . . Patience!」

On November 7, 2008, Daiichi Sankyo and Ranbaxy closed their transaction. A month later, the Japanese took majority control of Ranbaxy’s board. In the blink of an eye, Malvinder and his brother had added over $2 billion to their own bottom lines, and Malvinder went on to become an employee of the Japanese. It was an odd arrangement fraught with risk. But Ranbaxy lawyer Jay Deshmukh had new hope. Now that Ranbaxy had agreed to cooperate with the Justice Department and turn over the Parexel audits, perhaps the company could swiftly reach a deal with prosecutors that would make concealment of the SAR irrelevant. His guilt over lying to Une might lift. It would all be behind them. In the meanwhile, Deshmukh was in a strange new world. There was no more shouting—or decisions by fiat—in interactions with the Japanese. They operated by consensus, he found. It seemed to him that ten people got on the phone and little got done.

Despite Ranbaxy’s lurching difficulties, Une was pleased enough. It was his deal, and he documented it closely.「Mr. Singh fits in well,」he noted in his journal. But he also noted, as he delved into the work for his monthly Ranbaxy meetings, that the discussions on how to resolve the company’s FDA issues were「all just the beginning of the beginning.」On February 19, 2009, Une traveled to New Delhi and met with Malvinder. He was sorting through a host of issues, including how to balance Malvinder’s autonomy with Daiichi Sankyo’s governance and trying to understand the chronology of Ranbaxy’s troubles with the FDA. Something didn’t quite add up, but he wasn’t sure what.

He was back in Tokyo on February 25 when he got news that came as a body blow. The FDA announced that it would level the harshest punishment available on Ranbaxy—an Application Integrity Policy. An AIP was the drug regulator’s version of a scarlet「A.」The agency imposed it only when it deemed a company’s applications to be largely fraudulent or unreliable. Now the company would have to prove its products weren’t fraudulent in order to get them approved.

The AIP covered all the products for the U.S. market that Ranbaxy manufactured at Paonta Sahib. The action left no doubt as to the depth and extent of the problem. The stock market responded accordingly. Ranbaxy shares fell 18 percent and took Daiichi Sankyo’s down 9 percent with them.「Crisis!」Une noted in his journal. A gentleman to the core, however, he did not at that moment second-guess his most prominent employee, as another executive might have done. Instead, Une wrote,「even though it is the problem of the management of Malav-San, now is the time to cheer him up. We can criticize later.」Both Ranbaxy and Daiichi Sankyo formed crisis response teams. Within three days, Une was on a plane to New Delhi. There, he made continued efforts to understand why the FDA had clobbered the company.

As Malvinder continued to play dumb, Une was left with a Delphic riddle of sorts. Why would the FDA deem the entire company dishonest if, as Malvinder claimed, Ranbaxy had done everything right? All Une could do was parse the clues in front of him. He was a careful observer and wrote in his journal about his meetings with Malvinder and his deputies:「What I found out is that they also do not understand the reason AIP was invoked. They are not aware that the entire system was deemed suspicious even though it was partially fixed. Malav-San joined [the meeting] at the end. Members’ tone changes. They are very much afraid of him.」

Inside Ranbaxy, the AIP had caused tensions to boil over. Jay Deshmukh was at his wits’ end. He’d participated in a fraud, under direct orders from his boss. Now that Daiichi Sankyo needed to take charge of the FDA and Justice Department problems, it had every right to know the truth about their origins. The ongoing suppression of the SAR and the deceit perpetrated against Une seemed more indefensible with every passing day. And though Deshmukh had been put nominally in charge of cleaning up the trail of fraudulent dossiers, Malvinder’s loyalists inside the company were blocking that effort at every turn. In meetings, Deshmukh openly began to voice his dismay, on occasion even threatening to personally disclose the SAR to Daiichi Sankyo, airing a view that others shared but refused to say aloud.

Finally, in early March 2009, the growing conflict between Deshmukh and Malvinder broke out into the open.「We don’t think you’re doing things the right way,」Deshmukh told Malvinder at an operational meeting in India, with over a dozen people present.

「I’m going to stop you right there,」Malvinder interrupted him.「Who’s we and who’s you?」

「We are the lawyers,」Deshmukh said.

「Jay, I am very upset with you,」Malvinder responded.「You’re now looking at we and you, us and them? You’re not one of us?」

「Take it the way you want,」Deshmukh retorted.「I want this thing cleaned up. And you’re not doing it. Your guys are refusing to do things that the compliance lawyers and I are insisting be done.」

Not long after that clash, Malvinder called Deshmukh, who’d returned to the United States, and told him,「I want you in India.」He directed him to take the next flight over. Within seventy-two hours, Malvinder was glaring at Deshmukh across his desk and gave him three choices: he could leave voluntarily with a negotiated settlement; he could relocate to India and work on intellectual property but nothing else; or he could be fired and leave on bad terms. Deshmukh asked for a day to think it over.

That night Deshmukh went out for a drink with trusted colleagues and blew off steam. He complained that the company’s fall was all due to Malvinder, and that he was screwing over Ranbaxy’s twelve thousand employees and all their dependents.「There’s not too many people who are the worst people on the face of the earth, but this guy is one,」he said. He threatened to disclose the SAR to Daiichi Sankyo.

In bitterness, he had said way too much. The next day Malvinder hauled Deshmukh back into his office. The head of human resources was seated beside him. The meeting got instantly ugly.「I heard what you said,」Malvinder said, meaning that the lawyer’s remarks over drinks the night before had been relayed to him. Malvinder then directed the human resources director to leave. He told Deshmukh that if he chose to release the SAR to Daiichi Sankyo, Malvinder could take matters into his own hands.「I know where you live,」Malvinder said.

Deshmukh refused to cower:「Of course you know where I live, you idiot. You’ve come to my house.」He added,「Why don’t you get your HR person back in here, so he can hear your threats?」He then pointed out that if Malvinder tried to harm him while he was in the United States,「it’s going to come back and bite you very hard.」He added, for good measure,「I think it’s safe to say my Shiv Sena connections won’t appreciate that.」Deshmukh’s second cousin had helped form the Shiv Sena, a fearsome right-wing Hindu nationalist party linked to political violence.

「You’re a womanizer,」Malvinder shot back.「I have all the records on you.」

The men continued to trade insults.「If your father was alive today, he’d be ashamed,」said Deshmukh.

It was the lawyer’s last day at Ranbaxy. Malvinder forced him to resign. As he later reflected on Ranbaxy’s conduct,「Honestly, once you get to the point where you actually wholesale make up data points, hundreds and thousands . . . of data points, what’s to keep you from doing anything?」The effort to deceive Une continued, over the protest of Ranbaxy’s external lawyers. Had the microbiologist known about the SAR, he could have instantly decrypted the company’s woes. But without that crucial information, all he could do was keep on sifting the clues.

Around the time that Deshmukh left the company, Une flew to New York for a meeting at Giuliani Partners, yet another external adviser that Ranbaxy had hired, in the hope that the former mayor of New York, Rudolph Giuliani, could use his political heft to get the FDA to back off. The SAR was still not mentioned at the meeting, and Une was left to grapple with shadows.「I was told that Jay D-san of IP [Deshmukh] was the barrier of information,」he wrote in his journal.「I still do not know why Malav-san placed so much importance on Jay. (Jay has something on Malav?)」

Though Une was inching closer to the truth, a group of Malvinder’s top deputies and helpers still worked to keep the information from him. On March 16, 2009, Une was in New Delhi for a critical Ranbaxy board meeting. Before the meeting, Warren Hamel, an external Ranbaxy lawyer from the firm Venable LLP, emphasized to a company lawyer that the SAR had likely triggered the U.S. government’s investigation. But once Une arrived at the meeting, no one mentioned the SAR. After the meeting, Une noted in his journal that his「understanding of the background of the dealings with the FDA is still insufficient.」

As Ranbaxy’s problems with the FDA worsened, despite Malvinder’s claims that he was doing everything possible to resolve them, Daiichi Sankyo grew unsatisfied with his management. One Ranbaxy adviser urged Une to think of Malvinder「from the perspective of a parent raising a child.」At a compensation committee meeting on March 26, Une proposed to Malvinder that he forgo his bonus, owing to the deteriorating relationship with the FDA and the poor earnings result. Not only did Malvinder object. He broke down in tears. As Une noted in his journal, Malvinder「did not clarify problems of his own management, or his responsibility. In addition, he cried, exposing his vulnerability.」

By mid-April 2009, Une and his top executives had concluded that Malvinder wasn’t able to perform as a professional CEO. Une wrote in his journal:「Malav-san is getting more confrontational than defensive . . . we have no choice but to fire him.」At that point, Une blamed the problems on poor management and noted a「difference in attitude towards quality.」He pondered whether the real problem wasn’t「Malav-san’s secrecy.」

On May 8, Une finally told Malvinder that he could not continue as CEO. Within two weeks, the Indian CEO resigned. Months later, Une was still in the dark. But from his new vantage point, he had begun to see a different side of Malvinder. Une noted in his journal, in a tone as mild-mannered as ever,「Although Malav-san seemed like thinking about the company, he actually prioritized his family profits as a private shop owner after all. I was disappointed.」Even after Singh’s departure, executives remained loyal to him and continued to conceal the SAR. Lavesh Samtani, who had replaced Deshmukh as the company’s general counsel, instructed Hamel that an upcoming presentation to Une should not delve into the facts of the case and, specifically, should not mention the SAR.

On November 17, 2009, federal prosecutors invited Ranbaxy’s attorneys and outside lawyers, including Hamel, to Justice Department headquarters in D.C. It was time for the prosecutors to show their hand. They gave a hard-hitting presentation, emphasizing that the misconduct at Ranbaxy had spanned years and involved all of the company’s facilities and all of its drugs. In the sixty-seven-slide PowerPoint they displayed, the prosecutors tracked dozens of false statements. They showed that the company’s top executives had known about, and were complicit in, the fraud. The prosecutors made clear that, in their view, any unexplained misstatements in Ranbaxy’s FDA filings were likely instances of criminal conduct rather than innocent mistakes or oversights. Their evidence included excerpts from the SAR. At that, the Venable lawyers rose from their chairs. One walked closer to the slide presentation, as though to see if the image of the SAR was real.

It was a devastating meeting. But to Hamel, it had one silver lining: he could finally right the profound wrong done to Tsutomu Une. He asked Justice Department officials for permission to share their presentation with Ranbaxy’s board, which Dr. Une chaired. They agreed. Two days later, at a conference room in Venable’s New York office, Hamel showed Une the Justice Department presentation. The microbiologist was stunned. Suddenly, the bewildering problems he’d been confronting for more than a year made sense. The next day, in an email to a company consultant, Une tried to piece all the information together. He wrote that there had been a「whisperer」from inside the company, who’d taken documents that had been presented to board members and given them to the U.S. government. Brian Tempest and Malvinder Singh had tried to conceal「all the documents relating to the issues. This is the reason why the cases could be criminal,」Une wrote, and why the「FDA insists the issues could be caused by corporate culture.」

Finally, Une understood the true nature of the company that Daiichi Sankyo had bought. He felt driven by the need to make his company whole for the disastrous purchase he’d championed. Within three years, Une’s carefully written journal would become Exhibit A when Une and a team of lawyers brought their claim of Malvinder’s deception before an international court of arbitration in Singapore.