# Part V Detectives in the Dark

## 0501. Congress Wakes Up

JULY 2008

Washington, D.C.

David Nelson, a congressional investigator for the U.S. House of Representatives Energy and Commerce Committee, which oversaw the FDA, was at his desk in the Ford House Office Building on Capitol Hill when he read the startling twenty-eight-page motion filed by Maryland prosecutors. It laid out how Ranbaxy’s「systemic fraudulent conduct」was bringing「adulterated and misbranded products」into the United States.

Studying the motion, Nelson’s first question was, why had he been lied to? In February 2007, during the FDA’s raid at Ranbaxy’s New Jersey headquarters, he’d called the agency and demanded to know whether the action had anything to do with drug quality; if it did, Congress should have been informed. No, an FDA official had told him. Nothing to do with drug quality. So Nelson figured that the raid must have been related to financial irregularities and put it out of his mind. But now, many months later, it was clear that the raid had everything to do with drug quality. Something「reeked,」he would later say.

Why would the FDA continue to allow the sale of drugs in the United States made by a company that it knew was committing fraud? The agency had cause and authority to challenge every single application that Ranbaxy filed. But there had been no discernible action to remove Ranbaxy’s drugs from pharmacy shelves. Confronted with fabricated data clear enough for prosecutors to put in a court record, the agency appeared to have done what it historically did: almost nothing.

As Nelson pondered the massive and seemingly lawless Indian company that had tried to stonewall prosecutors, he had another thought: It’s happening again. Nelson had spent his year engulfed in another overseas drug catastrophe. But the Ranbaxy crisis seemed to echo one from decades earlier: the generic drug scandal of the 1980s.

David Nelson’s journey into a world of dangerous and badly regulated drugs began in 1988, four years after the Hatch-Waxman Act led to the creation of the modern-day generic drug industry. On a hot July 4 weekend, a prominent Beltway lawyer, a political operative, and a private detective arrived at his modest home carrying a large bag of trash. With his permission, they emptied the bag’s filthy contents onto his dining room table.

Nelson, a big, bluff Texan, had seen a lot of things in his career as a congressional investigator: venal corruption, epic incompetence, inexcusable lapses. But he’d never had anyone dump trash onto his table. As he studied the dirty, sodden papers, the visitors watched his face for a reaction. The trash had come from the Maryland home of an FDA chemist, Charles Chang, who helped oversee the review of generic drug applications. In the debris, Nelson saw tickets for a round-the-world airline trip and receipts for expensive furniture. The evidence suggested that the FDA chemist was on the take from generic drug executives seeking favorable review of their applications.

The people who had come to see Nelson had been hired by Mylan, the respected generic drug company from West Virginia. For months, Mylan had found itself inexplicably stymied in its dealings with the FDA. Its executives watched as less-experienced competitors secured lucrative first-to-file approvals while its own applications remained in bureaucratic limbo. They had heard rumors that Chang was getting his reviewers to slow down reviews or to fabricate excuses to block certain applications. Finally, the Mylan executives hired private detectives, who found a motive in his trash. Corrupt generic drug companies appeared to be bribing Chang with trips and furniture in exchange for approving their own applications and blocking those of competitors.

The evidence was enough for Nelson’s boss, Representative John Dingell (D-MI), to immediately launch a full-scale investigation and send the trash to the inspector general at the Department of Health and Human Services. In the months that followed, Dingell’s committee uncovered corruption that seemed to have no bottom. Generic drug executives had roamed the FDA’s halls, dropping envelopes stuffed with thousands in cash onto the desks of reviewers. Chang had accepted numerous bribes. A generic-drug trade association had subsidized the appearances of FDA reviewers at conferences with hotel bills they never saw. Representative Ron Wyden (D-OR) called the generic drug industry「a swamp that must be drained.」

Congressional hearings in 1989 revealed an FDA totally out of control, with no ability to adequately review the tsunami of applications that flooded its offices. Even the FDA commissioner, Frank Young, admitted that the agency was「drowning in a sea of paper.」Witnesses described wild disorder in the FDA’s document room, with applications lost amid teetering piles. The Office of Generic Drugs was a「horrible world of overwhelming work,」said its director, Marvin Seife, who led the office from 1972, when generics were at a trickle, through the explosion in applications after the Hatch-Waxman Act. Seife, a longtime public servant who got to work at 6:30 a.m. every day, became essential to Nelson’s investigation.

The hearings revealed that the generic drug companies had resorted to bribery and fraud in pursuit of a single goal: securing the coveted first-to-file status for their applications, which would give them six months of exclusive sales at a price a little below the brand-name price. Clearly, the original drafters of the Hatch-Waxman Act had not contemplated the frenzy this incentive would unleash.

One of the companies involved in the scandal was Quad Pharmaceuticals, an Indianapolis-based company whose CEO had given Chang `$23,000`. Gretchen Bowker worked as a bench scientist at Quad and knew that the company was required to make three sequential lots of a drug for approval, and that these had to meet certain testing criteria. With the very first drug Bowker worked on, her boss asked her to make one batch look like three by splitting it into three and giving each a different lot number. Bowker was appalled. She documented the fraud in her laboratory notebook so that she would have proof for regulators if they showed up.

Like Quad, the other implicated companies had done whatever it took to move their applications to the front of the FDA’s line. This rush left honest companies at an obvious disadvantage. The scandal shattered public trust in generic drugs. The FDA was forced to form an inspection team that went from company to company comparing claims in the drug applications with the actual manufacturing. Congress used those findings to publish a「clean list」of the companies that had actually made the drugs they claimed to. Nelson was often asked when he gave speeches,「Do you trust the drugs?」His answer was,「No — unless they’re on the clean list.」Even Mylan executives, who had launched the inquiry, were stunned by the extent of the corruption. They found their own company — and their industry — locked in a「life or death struggle」for legitimacy, Nelson recalled. A total of forty-two people, including multiple executives and ten companies, pleaded guilty to, or were convicted of, fraud or corruption charges.

In the scandal’s wake, the Dingell committee worked to ensure that corruption like the kind exposed never happened again. It backed legislation, the 1992 Generic Drug Enforcement Act, that gave the FDA the power to withdraw any application containing false data or to debar corrupt companies entirely, if need be. New regulations required companies not only to manufacture three commercial lots of a drug but to undergo a preapproval inspection, which would ensure that the companies actually had the capability to manufacture the drugs they’d applied to make.

Despite the corruption that had saturated at least half of the nation’s nascent industry, most medical experts and consumer advocates defended generic drugs. Joe Graedon and his wife, Terry, who wrote the syndicated newspaper column The People’s Pharmacy, assured readers that「a few bad eggs」shouldn’t spoil their confidence in the generic drug industry.

But even as the House Energy and Commerce Committee succeeded in strengthening the FDA’s regulatory arsenal and put up more roadblocks to thwart companies that flouted regulations, the problem of dangerous and fraudulent drug manufacturing was slipping beyond the nation’s borders. Within roughly fifteen years, the amount of pharmaceutical ingredients, by weight, that the United States imported from China would grow by over 1,700 percent, from roughly 5 million kilograms in 1992 to over 90 million kilograms by 2008. This meant that the FDA, which had struggled to regulate companies within driving distance of its headquarters, now had to regulate companies halfway across the globe. With the agency’s oversight precarious at best, foreign drug supplies became「a string of ticking time bombs,」as former FDA associate commissioner William Hubbard later told Congress.

A decade after Mylan’s private detectives had fished through Chang’s garbage, Americans started dying after taking a contaminated antibiotic, gentamicin sulfate, that contained cheap active ingredients imported from China. As it investigated these deaths, the House Energy and Commerce Committee learned that the FDA was barely monitoring the drug ingredients, known as bulk drugs, pouring in from overseas. The committee unearthed a 1996 memorandum from the agency’s own Forensic Chemistry Center that stated,「We literally have no control over bulk drugs that enter the U.S. . . . These drugs can reach anyone, including the President.」

By then, the FDA was inspecting about one hundred foreign facilities each year — an inspection rate of about once every eleven years for each overseas plant, according to a devastating U.S. Government Accountability Office report in 1998. Even when investigators found problems, the FDA would often skip a follow-up inspection in exchange for a promise from the manufacturer to correct them. The FDA barely knew what plants overseas had been inspected, or needed to be, as it was relying on a patchwork of fifteen different databases, most of which didn’t interface with one another. It was a system built on wishful thinking and infrequent scrutiny, which yielded disastrous results. The United States「turned a blind eye,」said Heather Bresch at Mylan, asking rhetorically of manufacturers overseas,「What do you do when your odds of getting caught are near zero?」

By 2007, as poisonous pet food and children’s toys made with lead paint flowed from Chinese factories into the American market, the U.S. government hammered out a「cooperation agreement」with Chinese regulators to improve the safety of food and drugs. In August 2007, the Committee on Energy and Commerce sent staffers to accompany FDA investigators as they traveled to China and India. They saw a threadbare inspection program that relied on the very companies being scrutinized to help arrange the inspections.

At a hearing that November, Representative Joe Barton (R-TX) begged the new FDA commissioner, Dr. Andrew von Eschenbach, to bolster the agency’s foreign inspection efforts:「I stand ready to give you the support you need to heroically improve the FDA’s interception of tainted drugs from abroad.」But an even graver crisis was already brewing.

That very month, at the St. Louis Children’s Hospital, two young patients experienced strange and alarming symptoms. As they underwent dialysis, a lifesaving procedure to filter blood for those whose kidneys don’t work properly, the patients’ eyes started swelling, their heart rates escalated, and their blood pressure dropped. These were signs of a life-threatening allergic reaction. Dr. Anne Beck, the director of the nephrology unit, directed her staff to wash out the tubing with extra fluid before hooking the children back up to the dialysis machines. For the next two months, everything seemed fine. But in January 2008, the symptoms struck again.

Beck contacted an epidemiologist specializing in children’s infectious diseases who immediately assembled a command center where a team worked around the clock to uncover the cause of the strange reactions. But as more children succumbed and the staff grew frightened, the epidemiologist notified the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. The CDC immediately contacted dialysis centers in other states and learned of similar reactions elsewhere.

As the CDC and the FDA began a joint investigation, their efforts pointed to a common denominator: all the sickened patients had been given heparin made by the brand-name company Baxter, the nation’s biggest heparin supplier. It was a drug that patients took intravenously during dialysis to ensure that they didn’t suffer blood clots. Within weeks, Baxter — at the FDA’s urging — began a sweeping series of recalls, until finally the allergic reactions stopped.

Yet the mystery was far from solved. Nobody understood why heparin — which is made from the mucosal lining of pig intestines, most of which come from China — was suddenly making patients sick. In February 2008, the FDA discovered the likely source of the contamination: a Chinese plant supplying crude heparin to Baxter. In a clerical blunder, the FDA had completely overlooked and failed to inspect the facility, Changzhou SPL, located about 150 miles west of Shanghai. Instead, it inspected and approved a plant with a similar-sounding name.

Predictably, once FDA officials finally traveled to Changzhou in February 2008 to make an on-the-ground inspection, they found serious problems. The facility had dirty manufacturing tanks and no reliable method of removing impurities from heparin, and it acquired the crude heparin from workshops that had not been inspected.

Chinese regulators were no help at all. A loophole in Chinese regulations allowed certain pharmaceutical plants to register as chemical plants, which made them subject to far less oversight. For U.S. congressional investigator David Nelson, whose committee was now immersed in the heparin crisis as well, the situation laid bare the「classically good reason to be suspect of production coming from any country that doesn’t have competent regulatory authority.」The FDA issued an import alert in March 2008, meaning that Changzhou SPL’s shipments would be stopped at the U.S. border.

Though investigators had identified Baxter’s heparin as the source of the contamination, and the Changzhou plant as deficient, neither the FDA nor Baxter could find any contaminant in the heparin. Urgently needing help to figure out what was wrong with its own product, Baxter reached out to Dr. Robert Linhardt, a chemist at Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute in Troy, New York, who had been studying heparin for years. He promptly sidelined his other work to dig into the mystery, and his laboratory joined several others working on the crisis.

Stumped, the research teams finally turned to sophisticated nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy machines, which revealed evidence of a contaminant: a synthetic substance called oversulfated chondroitin sulfate (OSCS). The ingredient mimicked heparin, was almost impossible to detect, and produced life-threatening reactions. The FDA formally named OSCS as a likely contaminant in March 2008 and concluded that it had been added, somewhere along the supply chain, to increase the yield, and profitability, of the drug. The contamination exposed perilous gaps in the FDA’s oversight and intensified the long-simmering conflict between Congress and the agency.

In April 2008, tensions erupted during a highly publicized hearing, with regulators, manufacturers, and victims’ families all in one room. By then, David Nelson had pieced together the missteps that had contributed to at least eighty-one deaths from the adulterated heparin, a number that would continue to climb. The hearing laid bare the FDA’s blunders in crippling detail: the lack of facility inspections, the poor risk assessment, the woeful technology. Nor was Baxter spared. The company’s own audit of Changzhou SPL, conducted a few months before Americans started dying from heparin contamination, was「incomplete, bordering on failure,」Nelson testified. He concluded that corporate America could not be trusted to do the FDA’s job — nor could the FDA be trusted to do its own job.

Under questioning, Dr. Janet Woodcock, director of the FDA’s Center for Drug Evaluation and Research, acknowledged that the FDA had little idea how many overseas firms shipped pharmaceutical ingredients to the United States.「It’s most likely between three thousand and seven thousand,」she said. The FDA also attempted to pin the blame on Baxter, adopting a common refrain that it was a company’s responsibility to ensure the quality of its own products. The hearing intensified David Nelson’s longtime fury at Woodcock, whom he felt promoted the idea that manufacturers could be motivated to do the right thing without the threat of an inspection.「Woodcock — may her soul burn in hell for all eternity — did not believe in inspecting plants to ensure the safety of the drug supply,」he said years later.

The issue is far more complex than Nelson allows, Woodcock later told a journalist.「Inspections are not a panacea,」she explained.「You always have to do inspections. I’m no fool. But it really is important to make this industry responsible for quality itself,」she said.「People need to own that as a critical part of what they do, not just trying to fool inspectors.」

At the hearing, the most powerful testimony came from the family members of dead patients. Leroy Hubley of Toledo, Ohio, testified about losing both Bonnie, his wife of forty-eight years, and his son, Randy, to adulterated heparin within one month of each other.「Now I am left to deal not only with the pain of losing my wife and son, but anger that an unsafe drug was permitted to be sold in this country,」the seventy-one-year-old widower testified.「The FDA and Baxter have not done their job. Somebody sure as hell didn’t.」Members of Congress expressed anger on Hubley’s behalf. At one point, a congressman interrupted a witness midsentence to exclaim,「This is thuggery. This is thievery. This is high crime and a direct assault on the American public. . . . Someone did this deliberately.」

Assuming the culprits were in China, how could the United States hold them accountable? The FDA was a disorganized, weak-kneed agency with limited powers. It faced a foreign country with little effective regulation and a government with every incentive to suppress bad news. How were America’s investigators supposed to track down, and prosecute, those responsible? In the decade-long investigation that ensued, pitting the United States against China and the FDA against Congress, no one has yet been held accountable. Nevertheless, the FDA’s webpage on heparin still states that the agency is「continuing to aggressively investigate the situation.」

Three months after the heparin hearing, with the vulnerability of the American public still fresh in his mind, Nelson read the prosecutors’ motion about Ranbaxy and realized that something else linked the 1980s generic drug scandal to the Ranbaxy case. Although the earlier scandal had implicated American companies, those companies had largely been run by South Asians, such as Quad Pharmaceuticals CEO Dilip Shah. Whether fairly or not, those investigating and prosecuting the initial cases had referred to the corrupt executives as the「Bengali mafia.」At the time, some of the defense lawyers had tried to justify their clients’ crimes by explaining that they were viewed as acceptable business practices in their homelands.「I was insulted by the notion that people would be considered innocent because it was culturally okay with them to give bribes,」Nelson recalled.

At Quad Pharmaceuticals, Bowker learned that, in some Indian companies,「it is seen as an asset to be able to do something in a creative different way that goes around the arduous tasks and gets you there quicker and cheaper. What we would view as cheating would be viewed in their culture as creativity.」This was the model of aggressive shortcuts, the ability to dodge onerous rules and get to the desired results by the shortest means possible, known as Jugaad, which the innovation expert Dr. Raghunath Anant Mashelkar condemned. As Dinesh Thakur put it,「There’s a saying in India. ‘We don’t have a system. We have a way to work around the system.’」

Jugaad developed as a survival mechanism in response to failing systems. In Maximum City: Bombay Lost and Found, the Indian journalist Suketu Mehta studies just the sort of workarounds, or alternative systems, that govern daily life in Mumbai (which was called Bombay until 1995). As Mehta concludes:

You have to break the law to survive. . . . I dislike giving bribes, I dislike buying movie tickets in black [illegally]. But since the legal option is so ridiculously arduous — in getting a driving license, in buying a movie ticket — I take the easy way out. If the whole country collectively takes the easy way out, an alternative system is established whose rules are more or less known to all, whose rates are fixed. The「parallel economy,」a travelling partner of the official economy, is always there, turn your head a little to the left or right and you’ll see it.

The parallel economy operates wherever the official state lies in tatters. In drug making, too, India’s manufacturers developed an alternate set of rules in part because the actual rules had been ignored by the country’s regulators. The Ranbaxy case defied the imagination of U.S. regulators and investigators for so long because the fraud was so all-encompassing. The company’s intricate system for faking data involved hundreds of people. And the U.S. government all but volunteered to be fooled by announcing its inspections in advance.

The congressional investigator David Nelson knew nothing about Jugaad. But he knew a lot about the industry he had investigated. Paging through the prosecutors’ motion on Ranbaxy, Nelson saw a dangerous junction between the「get rich quick」schemes of the generic drug industry and the FDA’s「see no evil」approach to foreign drug regulation. The result, he feared, was a public health disaster in the making.

Chapter 19

Solving for X

MAY 25, 2007

Cleveland, Ohio

Dr. Harry Lever, a sixty-two-year-old cardiologist, always listened to National Public Radio as he drove his half-hour commute into work at Cleveland Clinic. His drive took him down suburban back roads into Cleveland’s early-morning traffic. But this morning he was so engrossed in a radio segment that he barely noticed the streets going by.

The story described how the United States was importing huge amounts of adulterated food and ingredients from China that the FDA was struggling to inspect. The list was harrowing: toothpaste with ingredients found in antifreeze; fish bred in polluted waters and fed banned veterinary drugs; herbal tea leaves dried with exhaust fumes from trucks using leaded gasoline. The FDA inspected only around 1 percent of all the food and ingredients that entered the United States, the story explained. Imports from China were by far the most likely to be seized as unfit for human consumption. A former FDA deputy commissioner, William Hubbard, explained that investigators often blocked products that looked rotten or smelled of decay.「Filthy」was the official term. The FDA was so understaffed, however, that「only a fraction」of「filthy」food was caught and stopped at the border, said Hubbard. The rest was「slipping through the net.」

Lever parked in the hospital garage with the radio still on. His pager beeped, but still he sat there. Until that morning, he’d had no idea that so many products — apple juice, garlic powder, honey, hot dog casings, vitamin C — came into the country with such perilously weak regulation. Pets had died from tainted food. To Lever, it sounded evil.

He got out of the car but couldn’t get the radio broadcast out of his head. That night he started doing research in his own pantry, where he found a bottle of garlic powder made in China. Then he noticed that it had been certified as kosher by the Union of Orthodox Rabbis. His first thought was, a counterfeit certification. He went to the Union’s website. Sure enough, rabbis were certifying Chinese imports. But how could they know what was safe and what wasn’t? He called the Union and got a rabbi on the phone who confirmed the certification. Lever even tracked down William Hubbard, the former FDA commissioner who had been on the radio program. Hubbard verified the details, down to the tea leaves coated in lead exhaust.

Lever’s nature was「almost too passionate,」as his cousin, who was also a patient of his, commented.「He just gets furious when he knows something is not being done right.」But Lever didn’t dwell for too long on the problems of「filthy」food. He’d soon turn his attention to adulterated medicine.

Not long after hearing the NPR radio segment, Lever noticed that some of his patients were suffering from a low platelet count after taking heparin. He began raising concerns with colleagues. When it emerged that the heparin had been contaminated in China, one doctor called him a「prophet.」In his mind, he was just connecting the dots. As he did, his concerns grew. He realized that he could no longer assume that the drugs his patients were taking would work as intended.

Lever specialized in treating hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM), a condition in which the heart’s muscle tissue thickens and potentially restricts blood flow. The disease can strike without warning and is the leading cause of sudden cardiac death among young athletes. Over the years, Lever developed one of the nation’s biggest practices in treating the disease and helped uncover new methods to identify it early. At Cleveland Clinic, he worked from a small ground-floor office, where mementos from grateful patients lined the walls. Medical records lay in heaps on his desk, and Post-It notes were stuck to the cabinets. Most days he took lunch at his desk, eating the salads his wife had prepared, as he reviewed his patients’ echocardiograms.

Lever liked to visualize each patient’s case as an algebraic equation. A new symptom put an unknown variable, an「X,」into the equation. Solving for X could be relatively straightforward if the other variables were known. The brand-name drugs that Lever had prescribed for years were known variables: they had almost always worked as expected. Lever’s best defense for his patients was medication: beta blockers and calcium channel blockers that could offset his patients’ irregular heartbeats or help lower their blood pressure. Many of his patients also needed diuretics, pills that reduced swelling and fluid buildup. After the radio segment, Lever started to realize that some patients he had stabilized on those drugs developed symptoms again when they were switched to certain generics. Those generics seemed to be a new X that threw off the whole equation.

He started running Google searches. If a drug roused his suspicion, he researched the drug maker and the locations of its plants — basic information absent from the drug’s packaging or product label. With increasing frequency, he also contacted Cleveland Clinic’s high-level pharmacists, who routinely gathered data from manufacturers and the FDA as part of their research into which drugs the hospital should use. He developed a sense for which drugs, or which companies, to avoid. Ranbaxy was among them.

One night his cousin, who suffered from heart disease, called him and complained that he was feeling terrible. One of the medications he took was generic furosemide, a diuretic that helped him shed excess fluid. Lever immediately asked,「What are you taking?」His cousin read the label on the pill bottle: Ranbaxy. Lever switched his cousin to what he considered a better generic made by Teva, an Israeli drug company. His cousin lost about fifteen pounds of fluid in a week.

Another of his patients, Martin Friedman, a theater professor, was having trouble keeping off excess fluid, despite taking a diuretic. His ankles were swollen, and the only way he could sleep was in an upright position, propped on pillows. Lever soon identified that his diuretic, torsemide, was manufactured by the Croatian company Pliva. Lever switched Friedman to Demadex, the brand version originally manufactured by Roche (and later purchased by the European firm Meda). Again, Friedman immediately lost excess fluid.「It was pretty weird,」Friedman noted.「It started working right away.」

The list of sick patients and suspect drugs continued to grow. One patient, Karen Wilmering, had obstructive HCM, which blocked the blood flow out of her heart’s left ventricle. For years, to control her cholesterol, she’d taken brand-name Pravachol, made by Bristol-Myers Squibb, until she was switched to a generic, pravastatin sodium. When Lever ran another test, Wilmering’s cholesterol results were alarmingly high.

Lever asked Wilmering which company made her cholesterol drug. When she told him it was Glenmark, Lever「almost jumped out of the chair, because Glenmark is from India,」Wilmering recalled. Lever dialed Wilmering’s pharmacist and insisted that she be switched to Teva’s version, which he believed would work better. In less than a month, her cholesterol dropped back to the normal range. Even Lever was stunned by the new numbers.「His jaw dropped,」Wilmering said. The following year, Glenmark recalled thousands of bottles of its pravastatin sodium, due to patient complaints that the medicine gave off a strong fishy odor. A Glenmark spokesperson said the recall was「voluntary, proactively initiated by Glenmark, and not related to product efficacy.」

Some of Lever’s patients became as outraged as he was. Christine Jones, fifty-four, who had previously run a consumer relations division at PepsiCo, retired early owing to her HCM. She was put on the beta blocker Coreg, made by GlaxoSmithKline. But after she was switched to the generic version, carvedilol, which cost $10.87 for a four-month supply, her health deteriorated.「I was having way more shortness of breath and irregular heartbeats that were waking me up at night,」she recalled.「This went on for months.」She attributed the problems to her diet and lack of sleep.

Lever immediately fingered the generic. It was made by the Indian company Zydus.「If he hadn’t put two and two together,」said Jones,「it would never have entered my mind.」Lever switched her back to the GSK brand, which cost $428 for a six-month supply. She felt better almost immediately after taking it. She began to research Zydus and found a trail of aggrieved patients posting to online forums. Alarmed by these complaints, she called the company「multiple times」to ask if its generic was just as effective as the brand, but could never get what she felt was a clear answer. The fact that the Zydus drug worked so poorly, and yet the FDA had approved it, seemed「unconscionable」to Jones.

As Lever made life-altering adjustments — switching patients from bad generics to better ones or back to the brands — he was no longer just diagnosing his patients. He was following the trail of the global economy and trying to diagnose the drug supply. The preponderance of problematic drugs seemed to be manufactured in India, but some were American-made. Many of the ingredients used in the finished drugs came from China. Lever was discovering that a complex supply chain made it extremely difficult to know where drugs had been made, who made them, and which ones worked best.

With some drugs, the problems were stark. When his patients were switched to certain generic versions of metoprolol succinate, a beta blocker, Lever noticed that they frequently developed chest pain and their heart rate and blood pressure became harder to control. The brand version, Toprol XL, made by AstraZeneca, had a time-release feature that helped the active ingredient stay in the blood, but that was under a separate patent from the drug itself. In 2006, as generic companies started selling versions of Toprol XL, they had to engineer their own mechanism for releasing the drug into the bloodstream.

That year, Sandoz, a subsidiary of Novartis, in Switzerland, started marketing the first generic version. The following year, Ethex, a subsidiary of KV Pharmaceutical in St. Louis, Missouri, also began selling a version. At the time, only Par Pharmaceutical, based in New York, had been authorized by AstraZeneca to sell a generic version, so it used the same time-release mechanism as the brand. Lever became certain that there was something wrong with the Ethex and Sandoz versions.「You get this feeling like you smell a rat,」said Lever. Sure enough, in March 2008, the FDA inspected one of Sandoz’s plants and found「significant deviations.」By November 2008, after a stark warning letter from the FDA, Sandoz quietly recalled its drug.

Around the same time, a vigilant Cleveland Clinic pharmacist sent the package insert for Ethex’s metoprolol succinate to Lever, with one phrase out of the nine-page document highlighted:「Does not comply with the dissolution test of the USP monograph.」Lever was amazed. If the drug did not dissolve according to the agreed-upon standards set by the USP, why had the FDA approved it? Together, he and the pharmacist called the FDA’s Office of Generic Drugs from Lever’s office. They wanted to know: Were patients getting too much of the drug? Not enough? They couldn’t get a straight answer. Then, on January 28, 2009, Ethex announced a sweeping recall of more than sixty products, and metoprolol succinate was among them. Ethex later pleaded guilty to two felonies and agreed to pay a fine of over `$27` million.

Lever had no official data to support his observations. He couldn’t see inside the drug plants. But using his skill as a physician and years of experience, he had figured out that the drug supply was「sick,」as he described it. Whenever Lever switched his patients’ drugs, he tried to keep the dose the same. This helped to eliminate another X in the equation.

Sometimes, even the same doses of different versions became dangerous, as Lever found when treating Kevin Parnell. Parnell was diagnosed with HCM at age thirty-one. Told it was essentially a「death sentence,」he sought a second opinion at Cleveland Clinic. In 1998, at age thirty-nine, the very sick Parnell found himself under Lever’s care. In 2003, open-heart surgery earned Parnell six years of good health. But as time went on, he took more medication and higher doses of the diuretic furosemide.

By 2012, his health was failing. As Parnell sat with his wife in Lever’s office and described the problems with his swollen legs, Lever immediately suspected a poor-quality generic diuretic. Though Parnell had not bothered to bring the medication, his wife called their daughter and instructed her,「Go check the label on Dad’s bottle.」The pills were made by Ranbaxy. Lever switched the prescription to a version made by the American company Roxane and kept the dose the same. Parnell started taking his new medication right away and immediately started losing fluid. But three days after the switch, he got up in the middle of the night, then passed out and hit his head on the bedside table. He awoke to the sight of three paramedics hovering over him. He was rushed to a local emergency room and was later admitted to Cleveland Clinic. He had suffered ventricular tachycardia — an overwhelming, rapid heartbeat.

Lever suspected that once Parnell changed to a more effective drug, the dose was suddenly too high. The diuretic had rapidly depleted Parnell’s potassium levels, causing his heart to beat irregularly. Parnell finally received the heart transplant he desperately needed. After his surgery, Lever「was in the ICU constantly,」Parnell recalled.「He checked on me at all different hours.」He credited Lever with saving his life. Lever was particularly infuriated by Parnell’s case. He felt certain that drugs of varying effectiveness had harmed Parnell and had reduced the science of medicine to guesswork.

As Lever regularly paged Cleveland Clinic’s pharmacists and alerted colleagues to problematic drugs, he began to reshape the list of drugs the health system used. Cleveland Clinic’s vigilant pharmacists essentially ran a mini-FDA: they sought out bioequivalence data from generic drug makers, investigated the origin of active ingredients, submitted Freedom of Information Act (FOI) requests to the FDA for additional data, and even visited manufacturing plants, all to figure out which drugs the hospital should use and which they shouldn’t. As they heeded Lever’s warnings and reached for a larger set of data points — scouring FDA inspection reports and warning letters and fielding anecdotal reports from doctors — they developed a confidential black list of drugs the hospital would no longer buy, dominated by generic drugs manufactured in India.

Dr. Randall Starling, a member of Cleveland Clinic’s Heart Failure and Cardiac Transplant Medicine Section, was stunned to learn in late 2013 that a generic version of tacrolimus, made by the Indian company Dr. Reddy’s Laboratories, was on the black list. Tacrolimus is a crucial drug for transplant patients, because it suppresses the immune system to prevent organ rejection. The Dr. Reddy’s version was by far the cheapest, but the number of recalls of Dr. Reddy’s drugs had made the health system’s pharmacists uncomfortable.

Over the next six months, Starling worked with his staff to make sure that none of their patients was taking the Dr. Reddy’s version of tacrolimus and that the hospital’s inpatient and outpatient pharmacies no longer carried it. Though he told patients to use only Prograf, the brand-name version of tacrolimus, Starling knew that once his patients left the clinic’s grounds, he could not control what an outside pharmacy might dispense. It did not take long for his fears to be realized.

In October 2014, about eighteen months after his heart transplant, Cedric Brown, a forty-eight-year-old patient, was admitted to the cardiac medicine service with symptoms of acute organ rejection. Brown swore that he had taken every pill. Up until that point, Brown’s post-transplant recovery had been remarkably successful. He had been up and walking after a few days, and left the hospital within two weeks. The Prograf, which suppressed his immune system to prevent rejection, cost about `$3,000` a month, and Brown would have to take it for the rest of his life. By the time he was readmitted to the hospital, he’d gained fifty pounds and felt terrible. He was released after a month, but wound up back in the hospital’s intensive care unit within a week. He didn’t know if he was going to die:「I just prayed to God.」

On a Monday morning, Dr. Starling came in to consult on his case. Standing by Brown’s bedside, he asked him,「Did you get a new prescription?」

Brown had brought in his medicine.「Yes, I got something new at Marc’s pharmacy,」he said. It was a different size and color than the usual Prograf drug.

「Gee, I’d like to see that prescription,」said Starling.

Brown said,「Sure. Open that closet, there’s a bag in there with it.」

Starling fished out the bag, and there was the pill bottle of tacrolimus, made by Dr. Reddy’s.「You are never going to take this one again,」said Starling. And Brown never did. Starling set about to educate the other doctors treating him. In time, Brown recovered enough to go back to work part-time, as a driver. His insurance, Medicaid, covered 80 percent of his brand-name Prograf, and a fund at Cleveland Clinic covered the rest.

Doctors at Cleveland Clinic were not alone in their concerns. In October 2013, a pharmacist at the Loma Linda University Medical Center in California reported to the FDA, through its online complaint database Medwatch, that「multiple patients」who used the Dr. Reddy’s tacrolimus had「unpredictable levels leading to inadequate immunosuppression and subsequent transplant failure.」The report from Loma Linda noted,「This has only been seen with the Dr. Reddy’s brand of Prograf.」Tacrolimus was a so-called narrow therapeutic index drug that required precise dosing; minor variations could lead to life-threatening complications. For years, doctors who prescribed other such drugs, for conditions like epilepsy, hypertension, mood, or endocrine disorders, had debated whether certain generics were really interchangeable with the brand, and whether the FDA’s bioequivalence standards allowed too much latitude. Medical societies, including the American Academy of Neurology, the Endocrine Society, and the American Heart Association, opposed a switch to generics without a doctor’s approval.

Facing medical unease over the interchangeability of certain generics, starting in 2010, the FDA’s Office of Generic Drugs began to commission a series of studies of generic narrow-therapeutic index drugs. In 2013, researchers at the University of Cincinnati began a bioequivalence study of generic tacrolimus made by Sandoz and Dr. Reddy’s. They tested the lowest dose of the drugs in healthy volunteers and followed two groups of patients who’d gotten kidney and liver transplants. Their results, which they published in 2017, found the drugs to be bioequivalent to the brand and interchangeable with one another.

But at Cleveland Clinic, Starling and his team felt little reassurance. Months after Cedric Brown’s admission, it happened again — another heart-transplant patient suffering from organ rejection who had taken the Dr. Reddy’s formulation was admitted to the hospital. Several more followed. In studying those cases, the only explanation that Starling’s team could find was an inadequate generic. The Dr. Reddy’s drug became a variable with an unknown impact, in a treatment plan with no room for error. Starling was a doctor who valued control and was accustomed to solutions, but he was left without one. He had no Cleveland Clinic data to point to. But like his colleague Lever, his「index of suspicion」increased.

「I developed a stance of demanding that my patients take brand-name drugs,」Starling explained,「because I didn’t want any variable out there.」Though he knew this created a financial and logistical burden for Cleveland Clinic, its patients, and their insurers, the stakes could not have been higher. An organ transplant is a「huge investment,」said Starling — organs were scarce, and the average cost of transplanting a heart was well over `$1` million.「If we’re giving a patient inert medication, it’s a huge failure of the system. An organ has been wasted potentially.」

Both Starling’s and Lever’s patients had served as sentinels. In their fluctuating heart rhythms, Lever sensed that something was awry. It was a problem he couldn’t see and had no way to fix, but he suspected it lay in the distant manufacturing plants where his patients’ drugs were made. In the months that followed, as he took his quest to the FDA and to the news media, his instincts were proven true.「In all my innocence,」he said,「I stumbled on a mess.」

Chapter 20

A Test of Endurance

SEPTEMBER 2009

Silver Spring, Maryland

Based on the numbers alone, the Ranbaxy case held the promise of being a blockbuster.

Federal agents had emerged from their search warrant at Ranbaxy’s headquarters with over 30 million pages of documents. Three top executives — Malvinder Singh, Brian Tempest, and Abha Pant — sat squarely in prosecutors’ crosshairs.「I’m inclined to say ‘felony or nothing’ when it comes to the individuals,」one of the case’s lead prosecutors, Assistant U.S. Attorney for the District of Maryland Stuart Berman, asserted to colleagues in a September 2009 email. He would have considered「misdemeanors to resolve borderline cases,」he noted. But there was nothing borderline about Ranbaxy.

By the spring of 2010, government prosecutors had thrown down a gauntlet. They floated a `$3.2` billion settlement to Ranbaxy’s lawyers to resolve the company’s criminal and civil liability, which would make the judgment the largest against a pharmaceutical company in U.S. Justice Department history.

But over at the FDA, as Debbie Robertson worked alongside other investigators out of a war room stacked high with jackets, well into her fifth year of painstaking work on the case, her feelings of frustration and bitterness were growing by the day. She was not alone. For dozens of investigators, special agents, and attorneys, the seemingly slam-dunk case had turned into a morass and spread recriminations from the U.S. Attorney’s Office in Baltimore to the Justice Department’s Office of Consumer Litigation to the FDA’s Office of Criminal Investigations. Out of a sense of fatalism and superstition, some investigators wouldn’t even say the name of the company aloud. They referred to it as the「R Word.」

An alphabet soup of government agencies and divisions were involved in the case, including criminal prosecutors, two branches of the Justice Department’s civil division, inspectors general from several agencies, and Medicaid fraud control units. At the FDA alone, the agency’s Ranbaxy enforcement team now comprised at least thirty people from over a dozen different divisions with bewildering acronyms — ORA, OIP, OCC, CDER, OC, OCI.

Even at its best, this vast machinery could easily become dysfunctional. But the Ranbaxy case posed a unique difficulty: the defendant was headquartered on another continent. Basic investigative tasks — interviewing witnesses, obtaining documents — became major jurisdictional challenges. Could prosecutors get India to extradite anyone, for anything, let alone get an expedited visa for a witness they needed to interview?

A more human problem, however, lay at the center of the case’s difficulties: growing animosity and distrust between the FDA’s investigators, who had lived and breathed the investigational details, and the Justice Department’s prosecutors, who had been tapped to come on board. In theory, the two groups were on the same team. But somehow they’d become opponents as progress on the case slowed to a crawl. In the FDA’s war room, a picture of Malvinder Singh was taped to the wall, and someone had drawn in devil’s horns. Prosecutors objected when they saw it, and the picture was taken down.

It was a small moment of discord, but one that underscored the tensions that had led Robertson and her colleagues to doubt their very first investigative decision: to take their case to the Justice Department’s Maryland district.

The FDA had limited legal authority. For any formal investigation, it needed to partner with prosecutors. The FDA could have taken the case to any Justice Department district able to claim jurisdiction — in this case, New Jersey, where Ranbaxy had its headquarters; or New York, where prosecutors could almost always assert prerogative. But FDA criminal investigators had gone to the federal prosecutors in the agency’s backyard, only to discover how difficult it was to get the unbroken attention of a lawyer there. The prosecutors were split between administrative duties and other ongoing trials. They kept getting switched on and off the case, as the wrongdoing being uncovered at Ranbaxy seemed to grow in scope and complexity. Even drafting the affidavit for the search warrant took almost a year. Prosecutors kept returning it to FDA agents for revision, but offered little affirmative guidance.

Once the search warrant was approved, it yielded mountains of incriminating information. But Ranbaxy’s defense attorneys immediately claimed the material was covered by attorney-client privilege and managed to freeze review of it for almost eighteen months. Prosecutors did not assign a full-time attorney to review whether the documents were indeed privileged, and so they simply sat in government storage, untouched.「They took every batch record, they took files of emails, they took all the lab notebooks, they took everything . . . and then they had nobody to look through it,」said one FDA compliance officer.「They should have had a team of twenty people to go through it. It seemed all for naught.」

Robertson and her colleagues conjectured that, had the FDA gone to prosecutors in the Eastern District of New York, with their reputation for speed and aggression, the case would already have been over, with the company shut down and executives in jail. The disarray and lack of follow-through they experienced from the Maryland office led them to joke repeatedly,「If only we had a prosecutor . . .」

But more than anything, a single incident crystallized the distrust. After the search warrant, federal agents left an inventory of seized documents for company officials, as required. Robertson and her colleagues then created a far more sensitive document, which they called the「Princeton Headquarters」spreadsheet. It listed the most important evidence they’d seized, annotated crucial lines of inquiry, and contained potential leads. In late 2008, Ranbaxy’s lawyers asked prosecutors for a copy of this spreadsheet, a request that triggered a meeting between Robertson, her colleagues, and Justice Department lawyers, including the senior litigation counsel in the Office of Consumer Litigation, Linda Marks. They decided as a group that the document was too sensitive to share.

But just a few months later, on February 9, 2009, Marks emailed Robertson asking for the spreadsheet, with the intention to turn it over to defense lawyers. Robertson responded, reminding Marks of the group’s decision not to turn over the spreadsheet. Marks replied,「Is there still an original copy of the Princeton inventory without highlights or flags?」She added,「I would never disclose to defense anything that indicated what items we’re interested in, but a detailed inventory list, albeit agent work product, is routinely provided to defense counsel.」Her email triggered a meeting the next day, in which the group again agreed not to share the document.

Two months later, in April, Robertson got a horrible jolt when a Ranbaxy lawyer emailed her, asking for help finding a document listed in the「Princeton seizure log.」Robertson was stunned and wrote back several hours later,「I am a little puzzled. Can you tell me what document you are referring to as the Princeton seizure log and where you got it from?」The lawyer responded that the spreadsheet had come from Justice Department lawyer Linda Marks, in late February. With no consultation or warning, Marks had violated their agreement and turned over the annotated spreadsheet, their Rosetta Stone, a map of their thinking about the case, to defense lawyers, a claim that a Justice Department official would later deny.

In cold fury, Robertson followed up with Marks, writing,「Despite our agreement, you took affirmative steps to obtain [the document] and send it to defense counsel.」The document, she wrote, gave the defense「a roadmap」of the prosecution’s strategy and could even「help them to identify our cooperating witness.」She noted,「Actions such as this further diminish the already strained relationship between agents and attorneys, as we find it hard to trust a prosecutor that appears to be less than forthcoming.」

Weeks later, Marks pulled Robertson aside and said,「We need to talk.」

「Fine,」Robertson responded.「But my supervisor isn’t here, and I am not talking to you without a witness.」

Ranbaxy’s lawyers had first asked the government for a global resolution to the case in January 2010. This meant one settlement to resolve every criminal, civil, and regulatory claim that the government had against Ranbaxy. Though a daunting task, it was a simpler and far less costly one than going to trial.

By March, the FDA’s associate chief counsel for enforcement, Steven Tave, began to hammer out a possible resolution: a company guilty plea to multiple counts of conspiracy and making false statements; a criminal fine based on sales figures for all of Ranbaxy’s U.S. drugs from all its plants; a civil settlement related to the company’s false claims; and a consent decree that would require the company to transform its operations before drugs made at its major plants would be allowed into the United States. No foreign company had ever committed to such a decree.

But with a goal of midsummer to wrap up the case, deliberations between the FDA’s team and prosecutors bogged down over the size, structure, and even the theory of the penalty. Should it be based on all U.S. sales? If so, gross or net? Should it cover all the company’s drugs, or specific ones on specific dates?

As the two groups deliberated, the theory of the case became murkier and the size of the potential settlement began to drop.「Guess we are going with some sort of net sales figures?」Robertson wrote to her colleague Steve Tave in August 2010.

Tave wrote back,「That would require [the U.S. Attorney’s Office] to make a decision about something instead of using their canned response that they’re still waiting for something from FDA. (Oh, am I sounding a little bitter?)」

As the two sides bickered, and Ranbaxy’s lawyers pleaded for a resolution, President Barack Obama signed the Affordable Care Act (ACA) into law that March. It made generic drugs essential to the 20 million Americans who would now have their access to pharmaceutical treatment covered under the law. While the ACA did not enter the tortured deliberations by name, it underscored the importance of fixing the generic drug supply.

As the months stretched on without resolution, prosecutors and the FDA’s team traded thinly veiled barbs over who was to blame for the delay.「My management is again asking when this case is going to be resolved — and if we are going to charge any individuals,」Assistant U.S. Attorney Berman wrote to Robertson and Tave in July.

Irked, Tave wrote back to Robertson,「I want to ask them about the Consent Decree, which I sent more than a week ago . . . (but FDA is the one holding things up, of course).」

By September 2010, Robertson learned that prosecutors had not even pulled Ranbaxy’s sales data, on which a settlement would be based.「Looks to me like DOJ is admitting they have not done anything to bring this case to settlement,」Robertson wrote to her supervisor.「What have they been doing for 10 months?」

Finally, as 2010 drew to a close, Tave tried to break through the logjam. In a lengthy email to prosecutors, he exhorted:「This is a strong case. This is an important case. A lot of people have spent a lot of time building this case into what it is now.」He detailed why negotiations for a settlement should start at $1.6 billion and not go lower than $817 million. Reflecting the tortured process, he wrote,「At the risk of sounding like a broken record, if anyone believes that the evidence compels a different result, would you please explain what that result is, how you got there, and explain the evidence supporting that view?」He added,「We have a defendant that has been pleading with us for more than a year to come to the table to resolve this case. . . . There is absolutely no reason why we shouldn’t be able to do so.」

And yet, they couldn’t. By March 2011, one of the prosecutors was ready to capitulate and not impose criminal penalties for one of the main manufacturing plants. Robertson sent an exasperated note to her supervisor:「It just keeps getting uglier as we do not have a criminal prosecutor that will get involved.」

By August 2011, Ranbaxy’s lawyers had whittled down their counteroffer to `$260` million. Plans to prosecute individuals — which at one point had included an idea to immunize Pant to testify against Singh — had fallen by the wayside. As Malvinder Singh would remind a journalist years later,「I was never questioned or contacted by investigators.」Nor was Abha Pant.

Robertson thought frequently about retiring and longed to quit the case. But one thought kept her going: she felt an obligation to Thakur.「This man came forward and pretty much risked his life,」she reflected. The least she could do was help bring the company to justice, even if the effort was putting her own sanity on the line.

In the years since 2005, when Dinesh Thakur had first reported his concerns to the FDA, he built a business called Sciformix that employed medical professionals from India, the Philippines, and elsewhere to help drug companies deal with patient complaints and other regulatory issues. The company had even become profitable. But he spent much of his time at the Stein Mitchell offices in Washington, D.C., helping two dozen lawyers and support staff in Andrew Beato’s firm sift through roughly four hundred boxes of documents to help build the government’s case.

The twin obligations of Sciformix and the Ranbaxy case kept Thakur working almost eighteen hours a day. He traveled back and forth between India and the United States. Even during his return trips to India, he spent more time in Mumbai on business than he did at home in New Delhi. Though he remained impeccably dressed, with razor-sharp pleats in his khakis and neatly ironed collared shirts, the circles under his eyes grew darker and more pronounced. His temper got shorter. Even when he was with his family, who had remained in India, he seemed to disappear into his laptop and his own doubts about whether it had been smart to bring the fraud at Ranbaxy to the attention of the U.S. government.

Arguably, he was working hard to secure his family’s future and Sonal had chosen to remain in India. But day to day she felt isolated with two young children. He was more familiar to them as a face on a computer screen than as a present father and husband. When he was home, he would spend long hours in his basement office, reading all the materials his lawyer sent to him.「Mentally, he was never there,」said Sonal,「no matter how much he tried.」

Beato had wanted Thakur to tell his wife as little as possible about the government’s investigation into Ranbaxy and his role in it. The case and his lawsuit that had started it were both confidential, the related court records under seal, and Beato was worried about the safety of Thakur’s family. He was also concerned about Sonal’s discretion and how she would react. The resulting silence had strained Thakur and Sonal’s relationship to the breaking point.

In February 2009, Thakur returned to India, in time to celebrate Mohavi’s third birthday. On that visit, he took Sonal to lunch at a popular Chinese restaurant in Gurgaon, in the Royal Bank of Scotland office building. As their waiter brought the soup course in the crowded restaurant, Thakur said softly,「I need to share something with you.」He had decided to defy his own attorney for the sake of his marriage. Gingerly, he began to explain everything: what had actually happened at Ranbaxy; what he had done about it; how he now had a lawyer and was suing the company on behalf of the U.S. government; how his identity would remain secret.

Sonal stopped eating, and her soup grew cold. She was stunned — and frightened. Not only was her husband caught up in the dangerous machinery of an investigation. He had jump-started it. He was a key witness, whose identity could be disclosed at any minute. The family could be in danger. Thakur explained,「Look, they are playing with the lives of people here. I couldn’t sit back and not do anything about it.」

「Why didn’t you tell me about this before?」she asked.

「I wasn’t sure if you were going to support me. I thought you might have gotten scared, and then I might not have done it.」If he’d consulted her, he said,「that would have made me weaker.」On some level, she felt he was right. Had he consulted her, she would have given him ten good reasons not to report the fraud.

「Who’s paying for it?」she asked of the lawsuit.

He explained that his lawyer would not charge them, but would be paid out of the government’s settlement. That her husband had a lawyer, let alone a free one, was a bewildering concept. Thakur did not mention a possible financial reward for them. The chances of that happening seemed very unlikely and had not motivated him in the first place.

「Are we safe?」she asked. She knew what happened to whistleblowers in India.

「Nobody knows about it.」He explained that the case was filed under seal, another concept that seemed impossible to grasp, given how flimsy and political a tool the law was in India.

「Did you think about all of this before you filed the case?」

「I actually thought that once I reported it,」he said,「I was done with my job.」Long ago, he had imagined that a single tip to the FDA would be enough to stop Ranbaxy’s fraud.

For the first time, it all made sense to Sonal: the parade of bosses, her husband’s sudden resignation, the long hours he had spent in his basement office. He was utterly logical and not prone to making rash decisions. For him to leave a job without having another one had made no sense — until now. Though Sonal had a clear explanation for her husband’s actual and mental absence, this knowledge did little to salve the family’s wounds.

After their discussion in the restaurant, Thakur rarely spoke again about his interactions with the FDA, and Sonal didn’t ask.「You are doing whatever you need to do,」she would say in frustration, not understanding or feeling like a part of his decision-making. Whenever she did weigh in, her question was:「When is the case going to end?」It was a question he’d asked himself many times and could not answer.

With Thakur’s return to the United States, their marriage grew even more strained. Sonal tried to rationalize that he was absent because he was doing something positive to help others. Yet when she felt lonely and overwhelmed with the children, the thought gave her little solace. Sonal toyed with the idea of leaving him, a foreign concept born of desperation.

Couples counseling is not a regular part of Indian culture. So Sonal sought help from an older neighbor to whom she’d become close. Sonal and Thakur met with her as a couple. The neighbor’s advice was standard issue: try to make it work; make more of an effort to understand each other’s positions. But they remained apart and unhappy, and fought when they were together.「We couldn’t find that peaceful ground,」said Sonal. Thakur tried to bury himself in work. Sonal told him,「You’re just getting crazier and crazier.」

In India,「you don’t just move out of a marriage,」said Sonal. It becomes a family affair. And so their parents began to weigh in. Her mother spoke to his father about Thakur’s long absences and the pressure on the family. Thakur’s father then spoke to Sonal. The older man, who knew nothing of his son’s lonely quest, tried to impart some wisdom:「I know what you’re doing is not easy,」he advised,「but at the end of it, you have to make it work. The woman of the family can hold everything together or let everything go.」

Though hardly an enlightened viewpoint, in this instance it happened to be true. Thakur had chosen his path, and it was up to Sonal to keep the family on it. Her cultural training acted as a counterweight to her feelings of resentment.「In India, we are sort of taught to compromise on things,」as she put it.「You don’t start looking for options.」But with her loneliness intensifying, it was hard not to think about what those options might be.

As the government’s case dragged on and the tension between the couple grew, Thakur turned to his lawyer, Andrew Beato, to help keep the peace. Beato spoke to Sonal. He tried to reassure her that her husband’s identity would remain secret and that the case would end at some point. But he had a somewhat different message to impart, one that Thakur would never think of sharing.「What your husband is doing is unparalleled,」Beato told Sonal. There had never been a case of a whistleblower from India, fighting a battle of this magnitude in the United States, he explained. Beato wanted to let her know that, though anxiety about her family’s safety was「valid and paramount,」as he put it, there were「larger issues about stopping a company that was doing something very bad.」Her husband was「a hero,」Beato explained.

Thakur didn’t feel heroic. Mostly, he felt distraught. As the months — and years — slid by, he felt suspended in a terrible twilight: unable to move forward and caught in the past. Each time a deadline approached and it appeared the government would finally bring charges against the company, a government lawyer instead called Beato to request an extension. Thakur, on whose knowledge the government had built its case, had no choice but to acquiesce if he wanted the case to succeed.「I am someone who plans everything,」said Thakur.「I am a very outcome-driven person.」But he never planned to have the case hanging over his head for years, with no way to influence the outcome.

In the summer of 2009, Sonal moved the family from their freestanding home on a quiet side street to a gated community behind a guard post off a major Gurgaon thoroughfare. For the ever-social Sonal, the move eased some of her loneliness. Suddenly, she had neighbors with young families and a social life independent of her husband. The complex, named Unitech World Spa, had a gym, a clubhouse, parties, and even a singing group, which she joined. She drafted Thakur to be a part of it, though he was a reluctant and infrequent participant. The perpetually absent Thakur was a mystery to her new friends:「People used to question me, why does he spend so much time in the U.S.? Why is he there all the time?」She didn’t tell them. But the move shifted things ever so slightly between them. She became less reliant on him, and he noticed that his wife’s new life didn’t necessarily include him.

In October 2010, Thakur took his daughter to a Halloween party at the complex’s clubhouse, only to come face-to-face with one of his new neighbors, Abha Pant. She was still Ranbaxy’s vice president of regulatory affairs. Because of Thakur’s disclosures, the FDA’s associate chief counsel would soon send prosecutors a lengthy memo recommending that she be criminally prosecuted for her role in Ranbaxy’s fraud. Her name, as well as Malvinder Singh’s, topped every Justice Department list of「suspect persons」at Ranbaxy. Thakur’s name, too, was on a list, one that Pant may have known about: of possible whistleblowers cooperating with the government compiled by company executives.

The two spoke briefly. She mentioned that Ranbaxy’s new CEO had moved into the apartment complex as well, which was not what Thakur wanted to hear.

「I recently ran into Rashmi,」she added, referencing Thakur’s old boss Barbhaiya, who had recruited him to Ranbaxy.「He hasn’t changed much.」

「What do you mean by that?」Thakur asked, his discomfort growing.

「He still has a pretty big ego.」As Pant tried to make conversation, it seemed to Thakur that she was probing for information. She brought up his other previous boss, Kumar.「He seemed like a fish out of water at Ranbaxy,」she said.

「He was a pleasure to work with,」Thakur said stiffly, ending the conversation.

As much as he tried to disappear, he felt surrounded by the company and the consequences of his time there. He relayed the encounter to his lawyer, Beato, typing notes as they spoke in his ongoing effort to document the case. In a single sentence, he wrote to himself:「When the news becomes public, leave here.」

Chapter 21

A Deep, Dark Well

1998–2010

Durham, North Carolina

For three decades, Joe and Terry Graedon had been on the side of patients. The husband-and-wife duo, a pharmacologist and a medical anthropologist, respectively, wrote a syndicated newspaper column and hosted a National Public Radio program, The People’s Pharmacy. Over the years, as they worked to empower and educate patients in their search for cures, the Graedons held a bedrock assumption: the FDA was a competent regulator whose claims could be believed.

Even during the dark days of the generic drug scandal in the late 1980s, the Graedons expressed confidence that the FDA’s「exhaustive analyses」had found no problems that would endanger consumers; they remained staunch advocates for generic drugs.「We were steadfast in maintaining they were identical and you would have to be a total idiot to pay for a brand-name drug when a generic was available,」Graedon recalled.

A chance encounter at their attorney’s office a decade later sparked the Graedons’ first real doubts about just how exhaustive the FDA’s analyses were. There, an employee whose young son had attention deficit disorder told them,「When he goes off to school on Ritalin, he does very well.」But when he was on the generic, the teachers complained about his ability to function for the same length of time. In the late 1990s, the Graedons started to receive letters from readers and radio listeners recounting bad experiences with a range of generic drugs. One patient had suffered anxiety and insomnia after switching to generic Synthroid:「I was sweating more than usual and my heart felt as though it would pound out of my chest.」Another patient had become manic after taking generic Fioricet for a migraine:「I was stimulated beyond belief — typing letters and sending faxes at 3:00 a.m.」

The Graedons published these cases in a 1998 newspaper column, raising the question of「how well the FDA monitors generics after they have been approved.」By 2002, Joe Graedon had contacted the FDA and connected with the director of the Office of Generic Drugs, Gary Buehler. It was the start of a fraught communication that spanned years.

Before long, the People’s Pharmacy website became a clearinghouse for patients wrestling with terrible symptoms after a switch to generic drugs. Patients wrote in, desperate for answers. Graedon forwarded the complaints to Buehler at the FDA. Between 2007 and 2009, he relayed complaints about at least twenty different drugs, believing that highly placed officials would want to know what patients were experiencing.

In a January 2008 email to Robert Temple, deputy director for clinical science at the FDA’s Center for Drug Evaluation and Research, Graedon forwarded a complaint about generic Dilantin, an epilepsy drug:「After being on 300 mg. of dilantin for more than 20 years, I tried the cost cutting measure of replacing it with the generic. Numerous times I had seizures.」Graedon wrote to Buehler about the complaint,「This is most worrisome. We trust you are taking this as seriously as we are.」

As Graedon scrutinized the FDA’s standards for bioequivalence and the data that companies had to submit, he found that generics were much less equivalent than commonly assumed. The FDA’s statistical formula that defined bioequivalence as a range — a generic drug’s concentration in the blood could not fall below 80 percent or rise above 125 percent of the brand name’s concentration, using a 90 percent confidence interval — still allowed for a potential outside range of 45 percent among generics labeled as being the same. Patients getting switched from one generic to another might be on the low end one day, the high end the next. The FDA allowed drug companies to use different additional ingredients, known as excipients, that could be of lower quality. Those differences could affect a drug’s bioavailability, the amount of drug potentially absorbed into the bloodstream.

But there was another problem that really drew Graedon’s attention. Generic drug companies submitted the results of patients’ blood tests in the form of bioequivalence curves. The graphs consisted of a vertical axis called Cmax, which mapped the maximum concentration of drug in the blood, and a horizontal axis called Tmax, the time to maximum concentration. The resulting curve looked like an upside-down U. The FDA was using the highest point on that curve, peak drug concentration, to assess the rate of absorption into the blood. But peak drug concentration, the point at which the blood had absorbed the largest amount of drug, was a single number at one point in time. The FDA was using that point as a stand-in for「rate of absorption.」So long as the generic hit a similar peak of drug concentration in the blood as the brand name, it could be deemed bioequivalent, even if the two curves reflecting the time to that peak looked totally different.

Two different curves indicated two entirely different experiences in the body, Graedon realized. The measurement of time to maximum concentration, the horizontal axis, was crucial for time-release drugs, which had not been widely available when the FDA first created its bioequivalence standard in 1992. That standard had not been meaningfully updated since then.「The time to Tmax can vary all over the place and they don’t give a damn,」Graedon emailed a reporter. That「seems pretty bizarre to us.」Though the FDA asserted that it wouldn’t approve generics with「clinically significant」differences in release rates, the agency didn’t disclose data filed by the companies, so it was impossible to know how dramatic the differences were.

As more patients wrote in to the People’s Pharmacy website about their struggles with generics, the Graedons found that time-release drugs received more complaints than others. One was generic Toprol XL, the drug that had so troubled Harry Lever’s patients. Almost as soon as the generic became available, patients taking it began writing in to the Graedons, reporting dramatic increases in blood pressure and heart rate. They were nauseous and dizzy, they had hives and headaches, their hair fell out, and they had trouble sleeping and suffered vivid nightmares. Graedon forwarded some of the accounts to Buehler at the FDA.「What are you doing about this?」he asked.「If there are deaths it could turn into a big scandal.」As the Graedons later wrote of the response in one of their columns,「We were told, in essence, ‘We’ll get back to you.’ We heard nothing more.」

But it was another drug entirely on which Graedon planted his flag. Wellbutrin XL was a popular antidepressant sold by GlaxoSmithKline. As an「extended-release」formula, the drug dispensed its medicine into the bloodstream over hours, unlike older forms of the drug, which had to be taken several times a day. When the patent on Wellbutrin XL expired in December 2006, the Israeli manufacturer Teva began marketing the first generic version of the pill and contracted with Impax Laboratories to manufacture it. Teva sold the generic under the trade name Budeprion XL. The active ingredient was bupropion. Almost immediately, the People’s Pharmacy was flooded with troubling emails from patients complaining of headaches, nausea, dizziness, irritability, sleep problems, and anxiety attacks. Some people said that their generic pills smelled bad. Many cried easily. Some became suicidal. Others reported having tremors and even seizures.「I shake so badly sometimes I have trouble drinking water from a glass or I can’t hit my mouth with a forkful of food!」one patient wrote. Nearly all the patients reported that their depression had returned.

The similarity of the reports astounded Graedon. One patient wrote,「I have no history of suicidality, but a day after switching to the generic, I went into a week of steadily rising panic. . . . I was psychotic, self-loathing way WAY beyond anything I have ever experienced. I made it through the worst of it, called a suicide hotline, took two Ativan and didn’t take any more of the Budeprion. The next day I felt much better, and today I’m back to my normal self.」Another patient reported that after two weeks on generic Wellbutrin,「I ended up getting highly aggressive. I spent all the money in my checking account. I cut off cars in the highway and ran a red stop light. I could have been killed or killed someone else.」

One patient suffered a「full-blown panic attack with dizziness at 65 mph. . . . Then I began to cry . . . thinking, what’s wrong with me? AM I going crazy? Not getting any relief, I got out of my car and sat on the side of the turnpike as the giant trucks and cars went flying by. I was forced to lie down in a drainage ditch along the road and covered my ears to calm myself down because I had uncontrollable thoughts of running into traffic.」

Graedon reported the deluge of messages to Robert Temple at the FDA, who didn’t respond. But the FDA had also been amassing patient complaints. Between January and June 2007, more than eighty-five reports of adverse reactions to Budeprion XL rolled into the agency, where officials were largely dismissive, suggesting that the patient reactions could be psychosomatic and might be caused by changes in the tablet’s shape and color.

By April 2007, however, the Graedons announced good news to their readers that seemed to herald cooperation from the FDA:「We have arranged with the FDA to analyze any generic pills that readers of The People’s Pharmacy suspect are not equivalent to their branded counterparts,」they wrote.「Please describe your experience and send your generic pills with as much information as possible.」Medicine from across the country filled the Graedons’ mailbox, including「hundreds and hundreds」of Teva’s Budeprion XL tablets. Right away, Graedon could tell something was wrong:「They smelled to high heaven.」He sent them to the FDA.

At a fund-raiser, Graedon happened to run into a chemist at Burroughs Wellcome, the company that had developed the chemistry behind Wellbutrin.「What’s going on with this funny smell?」Graedon asked.

「That’s a no-brainer,」the man said, explaining that it was a sign that the pills were deteriorating.「It’s a problem with the manufacturing process.」

As he waited for results from the FDA’s tests, Graedon continued to forward complaints about Teva’s Budeprion XL to the agency.「What alarms us most,」he wrote to Temple on June 21, 2007,「is that many of these people have described suicidal thoughts as a result of this switch.」

Graedon was sick of waiting for the FDA’s test results. He spoke with experts about what could produce the symptoms that patients were reporting. He even reached out for help to independent laboratories. Tod Cooperman, the president of ConsumerLab in White Plains, New York, was quick to join his cause. ConsumerLab tested the 300-milligram dose of Teva’s Budeprion XL against that of GSK’s Wellbutrin XL. The results revealed the likely source of patient distress: the generic dumped four times as much active ingredient during the first two hours as the brand name did. Graedon compared the effect to guzzling alcohol.「If you sip a glass of wine over the course of two or three hours, you’re not going to feel drunk,」he explained.「But if you drink the whole thing in fifteen minutes, you’re getting too much too fast.」

The Graedons believed that this「dose dumping」explained why many patients were experiencing signs of overdose, such as headaches and anxiety, followed by symptoms of withdrawal, including renewed depression and suicidal thoughts. Teva flatly rejected the ConsumerLab report and claimed that the independent laboratory’s testing method was「inappropriate.」The FDA was silent.

In December 2007, Graedon and Temple of the FDA were both asked to be guest speakers on a Los Angeles radio show to discuss the FDA’s requirements for generic drug approvals. During the show, the host asked Temple about the differences between generic and brand-name Wellbutrin uncovered by ConsumerLab. For the first time, Temple admitted that the generic and brand-name drugs released their active ingredient at different rates.「The main point here is that yes, the generic releases a little sooner,」Temple said.「That could be described as an advantage.」He added that the early release was「unlikely」to make any real difference in treating patients’ depression. Graedon was astonished to hear Temple describe the early release as an advantage, as he wrote to Tod Cooperman after the show.「One wonders what Alice-in-Wonderland world the FDA is living in where up is down and a rapid release of 300 mg. bupropion is desirable.」

Temple later told a journalist,「Most of the excitement from people who worry about this come from isolated reports. Then you look at the results of bioequivalence studies, and there is nothing to worry about.」

Graedon wanted to speak to Temple personally. But in January, after getting no reply from him, he tried reaching Buehler:「We are at our wits end about how to proceed with this Budeprion XL situation. . . . You cannot seriously believe that the hundreds of similar reports are all coincidence,」he wrote. He continued to pepper the FDA with messages, sometimes on a daily basis. As he wrote to a colleague,「We have been nagging, cajoling, badgering, whining, complaining and otherwise making asses of ourselves with regard to the FDA.」

By March 2008, Graedon was furious. It had now been almost a year since the FDA’s promise to investigate Teva’s drug. But seemingly nothing had happened. The issue was devouring his time, and he’d have preferred to drop it. But complaints from patients continued to stream in: they were hospitalized, underwent invasive workups, lost jobs and homes to depression. As one patient wrote,「I have a long road ahead of me — just to get back to where I was — but then I’ll never get back. Because my experience with the generic destroyed everything in my life that was important to me.」

On March 17, 2008, unable to restrain himself any longer, Graedon wrote Buehler about the messages,「They JUST KEEP COMING! . . . These people are YOUR boss! They pay your salary. You are accountable to them. They are not nutcases, crackpots or idiots. They are real people with real problems and you must be responsible.」The next day, Buehler sent a curt reply to say that the agency was still working on the report. Graedon wasn’t pacified. The next month he followed up again:「I keep saying this . . . lives are at stake here. We must have your report sooner rather than later.」

On April 16, 2008, more than a year after Graedon first alerted the agency to patients’ troubles with the drug, the FDA released its report and assured consumers that it had been right to approve the 300-milligram dose of Budeprion XL. Despite「small differences」in how it dissolved, the FDA said that Teva’s drug met the agency’s standards and therefore was「therapeutically equivalent」to Wellbutrin XL. It concluded that the「recurrent nature」of depression — not drug failure — was the likely cause of patients’ problems.

As Graedon read through the report, he was appalled. Rather than test samples in a laboratory, which Graedon had been promised in 2007, the FDA simply reviewed the bioequivalence data that had been submitted by Teva with the drug’s application in 2003. Even worse, the data that the FDA had reviewed was from the 150-milligram dose, not the 300-milligram dose. Typically, generic manufacturers test only the highest dose, known as the「reference listed drug.」The FDA assumes that the lesser doses are proportional and will behave similarly in the body. But in the case of Budeprion XL, the higher 300-milligram dose was never tested「because of the potential risk of seizures」in volunteers, the FDA explained. Graedon was astonished. How could the FDA know the 300-milligram dose was bioequivalent without any data? Yet the agency had approved it for millions of people to take, based on test data from a lower dose.

What really floored Graedon were the test results for the generic and brand versions of the 150-milligram dose, which the FDA had included in its report. These were reflected in two curves that mapped the subjects’ blood test results. The curves were completely different. With one glance, Graedon knew that they couldn’t possibly have the same effect on a patient. The brand had a gradual slope leading to a high peak at around five and a half hours. The generic had a sharp rise that peaked at around two hours. The difference was「so incredibly obvious,」he said, that「any school kid」could have figured it out.

If that was what the FDA was relying on to call the same — a drug the agency had no data on, which they didn’t even test for their report, which was presumed the same based on results for a lower dose, and which were obviously different to the naked eye — things were even worse than the Graedons had suspected.「We were like, ‘Holy cow, we’ve got something big here,’」Graedon recalled.「This is the card that brings down the house of cards. In some respects, it changed everything. I just never imagined the approval process was so screwed up.」

The Graedons wrote to Temple and Buehler:「After reviewing the report posted today, we believe you have misled the American public.」Graedon had hoped that the FDA would come to the rescue of patients, but the agency seemed to be operating instead to their detriment, and from behind a closed door. Except for those two curves, the agency did not publicly release any bioequivalence data submitted by the companies. Temple later told a journalist that while the FDA study was「not misleading, it may have been inadequate. . . .」Uncertain what else to do, Graedon cast a wide net throughout the scientific community. He saw the issue as a public health emergency, but he felt stumped. Should he go to Congress? To medical lobbyists? To journalists? What was the magic pressure point to make the agency act?

By now, Graedon had become email companions and confidants with Harry Lever at Cleveland Clinic, both men swimming against the tide of accepted medical and political wisdom. Both were asking similar questions. In a sympathetic email to Graedon, Dr. Steven Nissen, chairman of Cleveland Clinic’s Cardiovascular Medicine Department, who had initially put the two men in touch, called the agency’s stonewalling「appalling.」As a high-profile patient advocate, Nissen was familiar with FDA inaction. He’d led numerous inquiries into drug safety that raised questions about the agency’s review process. He wrote to Graedon,「Don’t expect any action from the FDA. In these cases, they invariably operate in denial mode because, to acknowledge the problem, it makes it look like they screwed up.」

Graedon started hearing from a former high-ranking FDA official, who had offered Graedon guidance and information on the condition of anonymity. Graedon referred to his source as Deep Throat.「He basically reinforced our position that there is a problem and that we are on the right track and that we should not give up or give in,」Graedon wrote to Cooperman. In July 2008, Graedon met with FDA officials. They agreed to collaborate with him on a study evaluating the bioequivalence of Budeprion XL in patients who had problems with the generic. He figured the agency had agreed to the study to「shut us up once and for all,」Graedon told a reporter. Yet six months later, in January 2009, the FDA had yet to make any headway. As Graedon wrote to an FDA official,「It frequently feels as if we are dropping pebbles down a very deep, dark well. We never hear a splash.」

He continued to send complaints, including one in which a man wrote that the Teva version of Wellbutrin XL「almost caused my wife to commit suicide.」Graedon forwarded the report to Buehler and Temple on a Friday evening in February 2009.「Guys, this has to affect you, right?」he wrote.「I mean seriously, after all this time you are not going to tell us that this is psychosomatic. . . . When are we going to do something about this?」

In December 2009, the Wall Street Journal reported that Teva and Impax planned to conduct a bioequivalence study of the 300-milligram dose of Budeprion XL under the agency’s guidance. After a year, that study faltered, and the FDA decided to undertake its own.

Finally, in October 2012, the agency issued a press release about its findings, which confirmed what the Graedons had known all along: the 300-milligram Budeprion XL dose was not therapeutically equivalent to Wellbutrin XL, as the drug did not deliver enough active ingredient. The generic「is not absorbed into the bloodstream at the same rate and to the same extent」as the original drug, the FDA reported. Tod Cooperman of ConsumerLab was pleased but unimpressed.「We’re proud we were able to help uncover this problem, but it’s unfortunate that it’s taken the FDA five years to get the product removed,」he told the Associated Press. By then, the FDA had asked the other four manufacturers of generic Wellbutrin XL to conduct bioequivalence studies of their own 300-milligram pills. Of the four generic brands, one made by Watson Laboratories also failed, and the company withdrew its product.

Graedon wanted to contact Gary Buehler, director of the FDA’s Office of Generic Drugs, and ask: Why did it take the agency five years after he’d first reported patient problems with it to test Teva’s drug? Why had the drug been approved without specific bioequivalence data? But he couldn’t, because in October 2010, about eighteen months after plaintiff lawyers geared up to sue Teva on behalf of patients, Buehler had left the FDA. He’d taken a job as vice president of global regulatory intelligence and policy — at Teva.

Had the FDA wanted to tackle the problem of bioequivalence head-on, it needed to look no further than its own adverse event database, which collected reports from the public. It was also chock-full of complaints about generic drugs: patients had found their medicine covered in mold or smelling intensely of「rotten fish」or「cat urine」; some reported no therapeutic effect from their drugs,「as if the drug was not working at all,」as one patient wrote in; others had been directed by the FDA to contact the drug makers directly, only to hear nothing in return when they sent in their drugs for testing; and there were reports of foreign objects in pills, from eyelashes to insects.

While the FDA viewed these complaints as「an important source of information about potential safety concerns,」an agency spokesperson later explained that they required「careful review and interpretation.」The number of complaints could be affected by anything from legal proceedings to press coverage.

In Mount Laurel, New Jersey, in January 2016, Carla Stouffer, a seventy-one-year-old retiree, would have simply swallowed her daily capsule for high blood pressure, amlodipine/benazepril, were it not for a flash of movement. On closer inspection, she noticed a small, centipede-like bug stuck halfway inside the capsule, alive and wiggling. Horrified, she watched as the bug tried to free itself from the pill casing. She’d never thought before about who made her medicine. But she learned that the maintenance drug, which she’d gotten in a three-month supply from the prescription benefit manager Express Scripts, was made by the Indian company Dr. Reddy’s Laboratories. Her complaint became one of over a million related to pharmaceuticals filed with the FDA that year.

Much like the doubtful patients, Graedon had lost his trust in the FDA.「I had always believed the FDA had its stuff together, and just accepted that the approval process was perfect, because that’s what everybody believed,」said Graedon. But the more he learned, the less confident in the FDA he felt. One night at a party, he spoke with a GlaxoSmithKline executive who’d had too much wine. The man shared with him that many companies were moving their manufacturing operations to China in order to reduce operating costs — a new problem for Graedon to consider. He suspected that while the FDA was busy with its decades-old regulations, the companies making America’s medicine were playing hide-and-seek with the agency all over the world.

This flipped Graedon’s thinking on its head. He had assumed all along that the drugs the FDA approved met the agency’s standards, but the standards, he realized, were flawed. What if the drugs plaguing America’s patients were so bad that they did not meet even the FDA’s flawed standards and were being wrongly approved? That would mean that both the FDA’s standards and its approval process were broken. Even if the FDA fixed both, however, that would do nothing to solve the larger manufacturing problem: America no longer made its own drugs.

Chapter 22

The `$600` Million Jacket

2011

Silver Spring, Maryland

Scattered across the desk of Karen Takahashi, a meticulous FDA compliance officer, lay Ranbaxy’s most valuable asset: its application to launch the first generic version of Lipitor. The controversial jacket was stamped ANDA 76-477, and it would fall to the soft-spoken Takahashi and her colleagues in the FDA’s international compliance branch to review it. The clock was ticking.

In the generic drug world, nothing was more lucrative than atorvastatin. Each year, U.S. government programs alone spent $2.5 billion on brand-name Lipitor. Any delay in launching a generic version could cost Americans up to $18 million a day, a group of U.S. senators reminded the FDA commissioner in a March 2011 letter. Ranbaxy was first in the FDA’s queue to make atorvastatin and, owing to a settlement with Pfizer, could legally start selling the drug by November 30, 2011. All the company needed was final approval from the FDA. But Ranbaxy’s mounting problems had turned the once seemingly surefire launch into a nail-biter.「For Ranbaxy, this is the fight of their lives,」a lawyer for a pharma company told Fortune magazine.「This is the biggest generic opportunity in history. None of us know where this is going to come out.」

Inside the FDA, despite murky and chaotic deliberations over Ranbaxy’s fate, it seemed clear to some that the agency would never allow a company so saturated in fraud to keep exclusive rights to launch the nation’s most important generic drug. Ranbaxy’s first-to-file application seemed「unsalvageable,」a word that had emerged from government huddles.「This application will never be approved,」Debbie Robertson had told a prosecutor in mid-2010. As the FDA’s deputy director of the Office of Pharmaceutical Science wrote in an internal memo,「To point out the obvious . . . an approval of Ranbaxy’s ANDA 76-477 may not seem in harmony with the agency’s regulatory actions against Ranbaxy.」One way or another, the company would be forced to forfeit its application, and some other company in the queue would step in.「Unfortunately for Ranbaxy, choices are very bleak,」Dinesh Thakur jotted down during a discussion with his lawyer, Andrew Beato, in early 2010.「Even if they go to court, they don’t have much choice. FDA is not going to sign off on Atorva.」

Publicly, the agency said nothing about its deliberations. But as Takahashi and her colleagues delved into the application, fully expecting to stop it, the agency found itself in a quagmire of evidentiary, regulatory, procedural, and bureaucratic problems, a number of the FDA’s own making. The battle with Ranbaxy had become so convoluted that many of the regulators waging it barely even understood it themselves. They joked bitterly about needing RANBAXY — BE STRONG bracelets. But they soon realized that they faced a serious checkmate: if the FDA did not approve Ranbaxy’s atorvastatin, it was not clear when — or even if — Americans would get access to a low-cost version.

Ranbaxy had filed its atorvastatin application in August 2002. Under rules in place then (which changed months later), unless the FDA revoked Ranbaxy’s application owing to a specific finding of fault, the company could simply park its exclusive rights. Competitors would pile up, unable to launch, and the public would get no price relief. As one FDA lawyer explained the rules to his colleagues,「As long as Ranbaxy is not able to sell generic Lipitor, no one can sell generic Lipitor.」

Ostensibly, the FDA had plenty of cause to shut down Ranbaxy’s bid for six months of exclusive atorvastatin sales. The company had committed extensive fraud and needed to be punished. But in the topsy-turvy world of the case, an argument had begun seeping into the government’s internal deliberations. Because the generic drug company operated on razor-thin margins, it needed atorvastatin profits in order to pay the record-breaking fine it deserved. Unless Takahashi found irrefutable proof of fraud in the application, Ranbaxy might just get away with a blockbuster launch of atorvastatin.

Takahashi systematically reviewed Ranbaxy’s application from the beginning. Since 2002, individual reviewers had flagged anomalies: missing electronic data, discrepancies in resubmitted data, impurity data that made no sense. As the application crept through review, Ranbaxy had blamed rounding errors, copying or calculation blunders, and even its own lax laboratory protocols for the glitches. Company executives had claimed that test dates were inconsistent because the company had been inconsistent in what it taught its analysts.

But agency reviewers had found numerous「unexplainable」discrepancies between the original application and amendments that Ranbaxy had filed in 2007. Some test results changed significantly. Impurities suspiciously decreased. Pills originally described as「white」became「off-white.」In several instances, tests originally reported as「out of specification」now fell「within specification.」The changes suggested that portions of data had been entirely false, in total disarray — or both.

These were only the small problems. There were more ominous signs that data had been compromised. The mysterious 4 degree Celsius refrigerators, which the FDA suspected were being used to artificially slow the degradation of test samples, had held bottles of atorvastatin. Takahashi learned that in October 2007 an informant notified the FDA that a Ranbaxy vice president had faked atorvastatin records just before the FDA inspected Paonta Sahib earlier that year. In the summer of 2008, while inspecting documents from Paonta Sahib, the FDA learned that Ranbaxy had been throwing out failed stability tests for atorvastatin and other drugs, then retesting the medicines until they passed and reporting only the successful tests. An inspection of Ranbaxy’s research and development laboratory in Gurgaon, India, in the spring of 2009 uncovered similar deceptions. Takahashi hadn’t found proof yet that the atorvastatin application itself had been compromised, but the chances of it being uncompromised were almost zero.

The agency had had a surefire way to shut down the application — and failed to. In February 2009, it had leveled a rare Application Integrity Policy against the company, which compelled Ranbaxy to prove its products weren’t fraudulent in order to get them approved. Takahashi and her colleague down the hall, Doug Campbell, had written memo after memo arguing that the punishment should be imposed on the entire company.

Remarkably, the FDA cracked down on Ranbaxy with one hand and opened an escape hatch with the other. That month, the agency announced that it would impose the AIP on only one plant, Paonta Sahib. Although this put the brakes on eighty-five drug applications, including atorvastatin, it also left Ranbaxy free to shift its most lucrative applications out of the embargoed plant to other manufacturing sites, so long as it submitted fresh data.

In December 2009, ten months after the FDA imposed the AIP on Paonta Sahib, Ranbaxy filed new amendments to its atorvastatin application. After settling its patent lawsuit and making a deal with Pfizer, it proposed using Pfizer’s active ingredient and moving production to the Ohm Laboratories plant in New Jersey, which had a comparatively clean regulatory record. Even high-level bureaucrats struggled to understand why the agency would suddenly permit the company to shift manufacturing sites.「From what I know Compliance did not want us to permit this because Ranbaxy could use this tactic as a simple way to circumvent AIP,」the chief of the regulatory support branch for the Office of Generic Drugs wrote to his colleagues. Yet somehow the FDA had authorized the shift. The move left Takahashi and her colleagues with yet more work: they had to sift through all of Ranbaxy’s amendments to ensure that fraudulent data from the embargoed plant wasn’t being reused.

In April 2010, Takahashi began to follow another important lead. The AIP required Ranbaxy to hire an outside auditor to verify that the data in its applications was accurate. Ranbaxy had chosen Quintiles Consulting, which was obligated to report its findings directly to the FDA. In November 2009, Quintiles auditors went to India to examine the atorvastatin application and ended up notifying the agency of a「very hot」finding, as Campbell relayed to his FDA colleagues. The original records for the dissolution data submitted in 2002 were nowhere to be found, and the raw data on hand didn’t match the data submitted to FDA. The situation threatened to upend Ranbaxy’s application. The FDA required that applications be「substantially complete」when submitted. This was to prevent companies from submitting sham applications simply to be first, before even finishing their studies or generating complete data. But the absence of original records meant that the data had either been lost or never existed in the first place. If the tests had been faked, it could mean that the original application had been incomplete, a disqualifying lapse. At the FDA’s Office of Criminal Investigations, Debbie Robertson flagged the missing data for prosecutors.「Sound familiar?」she quipped.

Quintiles’s report made clear that unless the original data could be located, Ranbaxy might have to repeat tests with new ingredients and a new clinical study. And this would certainly raise the question as to whether Ranbaxy really was the first generic company to have submitted a completed application. Should the company keep its place at the front of the line or move to the back?

In late May 2010, the FDA’s criminal investigators learned that Ranbaxy’s newest CEO, Atul Sobti, had summoned a top Quintiles official, Bob Rhoades, to India the previous November over the Thanksgiving weekend and demanded to know why he would report such egregious failings to the FDA without first consulting the company.「He was not happy,」Rhoades recalled of the meeting, where Sobti dressed him down. Sobti later expressed surprise「that an interaction that was just part of a long process is being given not only an exaggerated, but an inaccurate, view.」

But inside the FDA, officials learning about the meeting viewed it as an apparent effort at obstruction by Sobti. It「should be the absolute last straw,」Debbie Robertson’s supervisor declared to an FDA lawyer.「The CEO no less. Not only is the culture of fraud and deceit still alive and well at Ranbaxy — it exists all the way to the top. All bets should be off.」

Few at the FDA disagreed. Meanwhile, Takahashi returned to the question of the missing data. What did it mean? And what could the FDA do about it?「Is it written anywhere that the raw data for a drug application must be kept forever?」the director of the Office of Compliance’s Division of Manufacturing and Product Quality emailed his staff. Unfortunately, it wasn’t. As the regulatory counsel for the Office of Compliance noted,「We have not, as of yet, been able to point to a regulation that says they have to keep the data forever.」

On May 5, 2010, a group of almost a dozen FDA lawyers, regulators, and criminal investigators met at the agency’s headquarters with prosecutors and Justice Department officials to discuss the sprawling effort to settle the case against Ranbaxy. With every imaginable punishment on the table — from prosecuting individual executives to debarring the company to imposing a record-breaking fine — the conversation kept returning to atorvastatin.

「What’s in the best interest of the government?」Douglas Stearn, assistant director of the FDA’s Office of Compliance, asked those gathered. He noted that Ranbaxy had filed suspicious amendments for its atorvastatin ANDA, and that the FDA should not be rewarding the company with approval but imposing a heavy fine instead.「Big numbers talk.」

Stuart Berman, the assistant U.S. attorney for Maryland, pointed to the remarkable statement made to Quintiles auditors by a vice president at Ranbaxy’s research headquarters in Gurgaon:「Recording and verifying data contemporaneously with data generation is not a cultural trait in India. We need to learn this as a habit.」It seemed irrefutable, said Berman, that「every bit of data received [from Ranbaxy] is junk.」

「Why are we working so hard to keep Ranbaxy in business?」Steven Tave, the FDA’s associate chief counsel for enforcement, chimed in.「Why not take a broad sweep — take everything on the market from 2006 on and pull it off?」

Or, said Berman,「put the settlement aside and start indicting people.」The question of a settlement was simply「wagging the dog,」he said, unless they knew how much Ranbaxy could pay.

But as they debated their options, the discussion turned to the implications if the company was denied permission to make atorvastatin. Tave acknowledged that「if we take strong action, we may not have a huge settlement because the company can’t fund it.」

This concerned Stearn.「If we let them have the first-to-file and they get a huge settlement, what does that say?」

As they mulled how to stop Ranbaxy from making atorvastatin and still get a settlement that would send a strong message to the drug industry, Roann Nichols, an assistant U.S. attorney, asked,「Is there a way we can not approve the first-to-file and let them sell the rights?」That way, there would still be money for a settlement.

Berman pointed out that the Justice Department’s position should not be to fund the fine through「ill-gotten gains.」

Without atorvastatin,「we won’t get any money,」said Linda Marks, the senior litigation counsel for the Justice Department’s consumer protection branch, who had skirmished with Robertson over disclosing critical leads to Ranbaxy’s defense team.

「The company has to relinquish the exclusivity totally,」an FDA lawyer, Paige Taylor, interjected.「If the application is tainted, it’s tainted.」

There seemed to be no perfect path to justice. As Nichols concluded,「Someone will have to make a decision. Atorva will hit the fan either way.」That was almost certainly true. Officials at the meeting left with the view that the application was unsupportable, and therefore almost certainly doomed.

At the FDA, the essential compromises of regulating overseas plants were already whittling away the officials’ tough stance. Just three weeks after the May meeting, regulators got a request from Ranbaxy to inspect a plant in Mohali, India, that the agency had not yet approved. The compliance staff understood this to be part of Ranbaxy’s「creative tactics,」an effort to get more plants approved to circumvent the crackdown on Paonta Sahib. By now, Ranbaxy had been under criminal investigation for almost five years. But the agency responded to the company’s request using the same approach it took for all foreign facilities — by asking for permission to come inspect the plant, weeks in advance.

On August 19, 2010, an FDA investigator wrote to the firm requesting「your availability and the firm readiness for our next visit Oct. 4–8, 2010,」and asked for「your availability to assist in or information on round trip transportation airport/hotel/firm for the Investigators.」A Ranbaxy official wrote back providing more details about the plant, promising to work out hotel reservations, and saying that the company would「arrange the invitation letter as well.」In other words, the company would once again function as a host and travel agent and get six weeks of advance notice to transform the plant for the FDA’s arrival.

Meanwhile, at the international compliance branch, Takahashi continued reaching out to different scientific experts at the agency to see if, somewhere, ANDA 76-477 had crossed some obvious bright line. Each inquiry seemed to loop back to the same place: the application could not be verified as legitimate but couldn’t be proven obviously false. On the morning of March 16, 2011, however, Takahashi had an idea: to stop studying the application and to study the company’s modus operandi instead. She asked Debbie Robertson for a copy of the notes from her division’s interview with Raj Kumar back in 2007. As a witness with impeccable credentials and unshakable integrity, Kumar had been a vital source of information. Now, as Takahashi scoured the notes, one particular falsification that Kumar described grabbed her attention. Kumar told investigators that for two U.S. drug products, the company had taken the chemical profiles of brand-name drugs, and duplicated them to make them appear as though they were for Ranbaxy drug products.

This got Takahashi thinking. The dissolution data that Ranbaxy had submitted in its original 2002 application looked suspiciously similar to the dissolution data for brand-name Lipitor. The company also claimed that it couldn’t find the corresponding raw data for those tests. Perhaps Ranbaxy had cribbed all of Pfizer’s data and passed it off as its own. This possibility had to be pursued. Though something short of a「smoking gun,」it became known inside the agency as a「smoking gun theory.」If true, it would explain why some of the initial data was missing — perhaps because it had never existed in the first place.

The best way to figure out whether Ranbaxy had passed off the innovator data as its own would be to comb through Pfizer’s Lipitor application, patents, and other public sources in hopes of finding chromatograms or other results that perfectly matched the data in Ranbaxy’s application. It was perhaps a mark of Takahashi’s desperation that she thought this was even a doable idea. The task turned out to be monumental. Pfizer’s Lipitor application, which had been approved in 1996, was stored in 220 paper volumes in a government storehouse in West Virginia. Takahashi learned that it would take four to six weeks to get the documents shipped to CDER headquarters in Maryland.

Takahashi was forced to limit her search to public records. Thousands had been available when Ranbaxy filed its application. It was a true needle-in-a-haystack effort that turned up little of significance.

As her options dwindled, pressure was mounting on the FDA to make a decision. Not only had U.S. senators demanded quick approval, but the six other drug companies that had submitted atorvastatin applications were also demanding action. No one knew when — or even if — the FDA would approve Ranbaxy’s application, and competitors worried that the agency’s hesitation would delay their own approvals.

On March 18, Mylan filed a lawsuit against the FDA in federal district court in Washington, D.C., alleging that Ranbaxy should be forced to surrender its exclusivity, owing to its use of false data, and that the「FDA’s indecision is permitting Ranbaxy to maintain a benefit to which it otherwise is not entitled.」As news articles circulated about the suit, an FDA official based in India emailed his colleagues:「These stories are not good in this environment.」

The FDA responded on April 4 with a hard-hitting motion to dismiss Mylan’s suit, arguing that it was under no obligation to disclose confidential deliberations or to help Mylan with its business planning. On May 2, a judge agreed, ruling that one company couldn’t intervene in another company’s application. Investors interpreted the FDA’s stance in the Mylan case as a hint that the agency was planning to allow Ranbaxy to sell atorvastatin in November. Ranbaxy’s shares rose on the news. But no one, including Ranbaxy, knew where the agency’s deliberations would lead. By then, Wall Street analysts had mapped out complex flow charts of potential scenarios and their market impact.

But the compliance staff knew where it should come out. One month earlier, they circulated a memo with questions and possible answers. One was,「Should the government insist that Ranbaxy forfeit exclusivity for Atorvastatin, even if it means a substantial decrease in the settlement’s potentially large recovery?」The answer was,「Yes, it is in the best interest of public health.」

Yet the machinery of the agency kept moving toward approving the drug. In May 2011, Deb Autor’s division, the Office of Compliance, sent a memo to the director of the Center for Drug Evaluation and Research, with a fateful recommendation. The memo urged that the Office of Generic Drugs formally review Ranbaxy’s atorvastatin application and expedite the process under an exception to the Application Integrity Policy imposed on Ranbaxy. It argued that if there was fraud, a review could detect it, an argument that could be easily controverted, if anyone was inclined to argue. But with the U.S. government spending `$2.5` billion on brand-name Lipitor each year, there were larger forces at work. The logic, as Doug Campbell later replayed it, was:「‘All we can do is block it, but we’re not going to block it, because we’re all going to save millions of dollars.’」

As the Office of Generic Drugs started formally reviewing Ranbaxy’s revamped atorvastatin application, objections that once seemed insurmountable fell away. By mid-October, the necessary review divisions had signed off on the application. The FDA prepared to announce its approval. By early November, the agency finalized a press release and drafted responses to anticipated questions. It seemed that November 7, just three weeks before the final deadline for approval, would be the big day for the agency to greenlight Ranbaxy’s drug.

But that morning agency officials panicked. They realized — in a major oversight — that the FDA had not conducted a preapproval inspection of a plant that Ranbaxy had now listed as a main source for the active ingredients. Previously, Ranbaxy had told the agency that it would assemble and bottle its atorvastatin at its plant in New Jersey and use active ingredients from Pfizer’s plant in Cork, Ireland. But in late July 2011, Ranbaxy changed this and told the FDA that it would also use active ingredients made at its own plant Toansa, in Punjab, a decision that had bewildered the agency.「Seems ridiculous to me that Ranbaxy decided to use its own API,」the FDA lawyer Marci Norton wrote to Doug Campbell.「Given how high profile this drug is, you’d have thought the smarter course would’ve been to use Pfizer’s API.」

By its own standards, the agency was supposed to inspect every drug manufacturing facility once every two years. The Toansa plant was due for another visit. At an emergency meeting that afternoon, FDA officers decided to delay an announcement and rush an inspection there.

On November 21, nine days before Ranbaxy could potentially start shipping generic Lipitor, two FDA investigators arrived at Toansa to determine two things: whether the plant followed good manufacturing practices, and whether it was capable of safely making the active ingredient for atorvastatin. One of the investigators, Regina Brown, had originally found the unregistered refrigerators full of samples at Paonta Sahib.

As the inspection of Toansa progressed, the regulators back in Maryland waited anxiously for the outcome. On Thanksgiving, Brown wrote back to Campbell, summarizing problems she’d observed so far. She found workers poorly trained and openly using scrap paper while making a batch of atorvastatin, a breach that pointed to a lack of control and potential data manipulation. Fourteen hours later, when she sent him a draft of her findings, it was clear the inspection had deteriorated further. She’d found a shredder in the middle of the production floor, and evidence that records related to batches were being destroyed.「Each scrap paper incident led us into deeper doo-doo,」she wrote to Campbell.

On Friday, November 25, with five days to go until Ranbaxy could start manufacturing atorvastatin and with the FDA’s decision still unmade, Campbell was troubled not just by Brown’s findings but by what he felt to be the agency’s inexorable drift toward approval. He was also running out of time. The Office of Generic Drugs had been pressuring him to submit his team’s official recommendation either for or against approval by the end of the week — and it was now Friday morning. The lawyer Marci Norton, who’d been immersed in settlement negotiations with Ranbaxy’s lawyers, told Campbell to wait until Monday, when everyone would be back in the office. There was no room for mistakes.「This decision likely will undergo heavy scrutiny, perhaps in court and likely by Congress,」she wrote.

Still, Norton worried that Brown might classify the inspection as Official Action Indicated (OAI), the worst rating a drug facility can get. In the face of such a finding, it would make no sense for the FDA to approve Ranbaxy’s atorvastatin application. Campbell had reassured Norton:「I will touch bases with you before anything goes OAI.」

Norton knew that the agency was staring down the barrel of a no-win situation. If it didn’t approve Ranbaxy’s application, criticism would rain down from Congress and patient groups that were demanding an affordable Lipitor alternative. Also, Ranbaxy would likely refuse to settle the larger case if the company didn’t get its atorvastatin approved. But if the FDA did approve the application, it could knowingly be greenlighting a drug made in a subpar plant.

The white-knuckled regulators wanted a clear path to say yes. But less than an hour later, Regina Brown sent in a copy of the final inspection report. Norton’s biggest fear had come true. Brown recommended giving Toansa a flunking grade, or OAI, for failing to use good manufacturing practices. As she summed up in an email,「We saw too much scrap paper in use.」She noted:「It was suspect to even have a shredder there for general use.」

Presumably, since the plant couldn’t function safely, this should have been enough to disqualify its bid to make atorvastatin. But Brown essentially split her vote. In a remarkable decision, she deemed the plant「acceptable」to make the drug ingredients and recommended that the application be approved. She concluded that for the purposes of generic Lipitor, the deficiencies could be overlooked.「The firm has got a lot of experience now」making atorvastatin active ingredients, she wrote. It was, Brown admitted,「an unusual recommendation.」Under pressure, she had essentially rolled the dice: the plant was bad, but it could likely make a good drug.

Regulators could see the outlines of a disaster looming. The plant had failed a review of its good manufacturing practices. It didn’t meet the FDA’s standards. But there were only twenty-four hours left to either green-light Ranbaxy’s generic Lipitor or leave millions of Americans in the lurch.

In an emergency call with the FDA’s India office, regulators weighed the essential conundrum: The agency had found unacceptable procedures but still had faith in the active ingredients. What was the explanation for that? Several regulators wanted more time before they made their decision. Another asked a more fateful question:「Why should the American people want this [active ingredient] from this company in India?」The lawyer Norton chimed in, explaining that unless the agency approved the atorvastatin, Ranbaxy wouldn’t sign a consent decree, a settlement agreement that had been in the works for years. Ranbaxy, despite having committed fraud on a vast scale, seemed to have backed the agency into a corner. She concluded,「The commissioner may have to weigh in.」

November 30, 2011, dawned cold and dry in Washington, D.C. Doug Campbell awoke with a feeling of dread. He did not relish the day ahead. By the time he got to work, media calls about atorvastatin were pouring in. The Office of Compliance had yet to issue its final recommendation for Ranbaxy’s application. Though the inspection’s facts were the facts and presumably could not be changed, Regina Brown’s recommendation had left the FDA with a「narrative」problem: how could the agency justify approving Ranbaxy’s drug if the plant making the principal ingredient couldn’t meet basic manufacturing standards?

The facts could be altered. The Office of Compliance prepared a draft memo for approval in which it changed investigator Regina Brown’s dim assessment of Toansa’s good manufacturing practices from「Official Action Indicated」to「acceptable CGMP status.」It stated that after interviewing the inspection team「at length」and reviewing a draft report,「every subject matter expert consulted during the review process agreed that the facts surrounding the deficiencies do not warrant regulatory action.」To get from never to yes, the agency had changed an inconvenient fact and overlooked obvious warning signs.

By day’s end, the FDA informed Ranbaxy that its ANDA was approved. The scandal-ravaged company had gotten its prize: the lucrative rights to make generic Lipitor exclusively for six months, then alongside competitors after that. At 8:12 p.m., the agency issued a press release announcing the news to the public. In India, Ranbaxy’s latest CEO and managing director, Arun Sawhney, addressed his staff. The U.S. launch of generic Lipitor, he said, was a「historic moment for every Indian and the entire generic industry of the world.」He exulted,「It’s a spirit of never say die,」adding that the story of generic Lipitor had been「nothing short of a thriller」and that, in a competitive world,「Ranbaxy will turn out on top in the Atorvastatin market.」Ranbaxy started shipping the drug the next morning. Based on preorders alone, it generated `$100` million of revenue in the first twenty-four hours, and nearly $600 million within six months.

At the FDA, the compliance staff congratulated one another and convinced themselves that, ultimately, they had done the right thing. But a deeper unease about the decision, and the process by which it was reached, settled over the group. And it didn’t take long for the regulators to realize just how badly they’d been manipulated. Ranbaxy had initially reassured the FDA that the drug would be made in the United States under the highest manufacturing quality it could muster. But on December 1, one day after the agency had given the company the green light, Ranbaxy filed a request with the FDA to use a different manufacturing site to make the finished doses of atorvastatin: its plant in Mohali, India. With its approval in place, the company planned to shift manufacturing back to a lower-cost plant with less oversight. It was the same plant where the FDA had asked for an「invitation」to inspect and gave the company six weeks advance notice of its arrival.

Even the regulators well versed in the company’s「creative tactics」were stunned.「What do we know about the Mohali site?」the deputy director of the pharmaceutical science office asked a group of colleagues.

「Well, it’s not in New Jersey!」a regulatory lawyer shot back.

From its seemingly unwinnable position, Ranbaxy had played its losing hand perfectly — and won.「They worked the Agency like a Hammond organ, a fine Stradivarius,」Campbell later said.

Ranbaxy continued to offer the FDA the veneer of compliance. In a March 2012 email, the head of Ranbaxy global quality wrote to Campbell:「In the spirit of transparency & cooperation with the FDA, I confirm that the shredder at Toansa is now confirmed as relocated out of the manufacturing area and that it now resides in the Toansa QA block with continuing controls for its use.」However, in the coming months, the concerns of Takahashi and her colleagues —  that Ranbaxy was still concealing fraud and Americans would be getting an inferior drug — would prove dismayingly well founded.