# Part VI The Watershed

## 0601. The Light Switch

DECEMBER 7, 2012

Toansa, Punjab India

As the FDA looked for investigators willing to relocate and join its sparsely staffed offices in India, the agency did not have many takers. But Peter Baker, the young consumer safety officer, raised his hand. He had a love of travel and adventure and took yearly trips with his motorcycle group to far-flung locations, from Mongolia to the Philippines. He also had a more pragmatic reason to volunteer. By reputation, India was the world leader in aseptic manufacturing, the exacting science of producing sterile drugs. Baker figured that after a stint in India reviewing best practices, he’d return to the United States with expert knowledge that would advance his career.

Just three months after arriving in New Delhi, he got a critical assignment: to inspect Ranbaxy’s Toansa plant in a remote area of northern Punjab, where the company made the active ingredient for its generic Lipitor, atorvastatin.

It was the same troubled plant that had squeaked through a last-minute inspection, largely owing to the intervention of FDA bureaucrats. But only ten months after Ranbaxy began its lucrative launch of atorvastatin, the company made a staggering admission to the FDA. It had discovered that some of the millions of pills already dispensed to patients across the United States were suffused with tiny shards of blue glass. The manufacturing failure confirmed the worst fears of the FDA’s compliance staff. Ranbaxy should never have been approved to make the drug. Now, as the company recalled millions of implicated pills, the FDA dispatched Baker to the Toansa plant, where the active ingredient had been made, to figure out what went wrong.

For the high-stakes inspection, Baker was paired with another veteran FDA investigator, Atul Agrawal, who was stationed in Mumbai. The two men were opposites: Baker was young, handsome, and athletic, with close-cut, brownish-blond hair; Agrawal was short, balding, and walked with a limp. But the two men shared one trait: they disliked being fooled. This time, because the inspection was so vital, the FDA’s India office had given Ranbaxy only a few hours of advance notice—less time to conceal evidence. But Baker and Agrawal wound up in the wrong town and had to backtrack, which took hours and bought Ranbaxy additional time.

The investigators finally arrived at the vast plant complex, with dozens of buildings stretched over acres. A corporate executive from Ranbaxy’s headquarters had beaten them there. The executive had taken the first flight from New Delhi that morning, which meant the company must have gotten word of the inspection the night before. Someone from the FDA’s India office had almost certainly leaked it.

Plant officials proposed that the investigators first sit for a presentation. Agrawal insisted that they be taken immediately to the building where the glass contamination had occurred. The officials took them to the MP-11 plant. There they explained that the contamination had come from a blue-glass protection ring that encircled the top hatch of a reactor, a big rounded vessel into which they shoveled ingredients, and mixed them to cause a chemical reaction. They claimed that they could not show the investigators the protection ring because they had since removed it; instead, they showed the men a photograph of it with a small chip in the glass. Baker studied the image of the small round imperfection, thinking that it looked too perfect. It was almost as though someone had carefully taken a hammer to it. How could that have caused enough broken glass to contaminate millions of pills?

As Agrawal and Baker inspected more of the reactors, they peered down through the hatches on top at the glass-lined walls. They even had plant employees hold their legs, as they dangled upside-down inside the reactors. As a knot of Ranbaxy officials waited silently, Baker cast a flashlight beam across the cylindrical walls of an enormous steel silo. He caught sight of a spiderweb-like crack along one of the glass linings and followed it with his flashlight. He doubted that the crack was the cause of the catastrophe. But he was certain that the hovering officials were doing everything in their power to keep him in the dark.

Inside another reactor he saw heaps of powder residue, as though it had never been cleaned. He asked to see the inspection forms. All the results were documented simply as「OK,」with no notes next to them. The cleaning checklist had been signed by two different technicians. As Baker questioned plant officials, they first spoke among themselves in Hindi, as though to get their facts straight. Amid pointed questioning, they admitted that those who’d signed the logs had not actually done the cleaning.

As the inspection continued, a plant official mentioned that the company planned to grind, refilter, and resell the glass-infused ingredients. The investigators explained that the material was too compromised, so plant officials pledged to destroy it. In the United States, it was standard protocol for investigators to witness the destruction of products deemed too dangerous to use. Baker himself had once visited a dump and watched as a company poured bleach over mountains of fish that had gone bad, before running over the piles with a bulldozer, as the fish exploded from the built-up toxic gases. Baker and Agrawal didn’t trust Ranbaxy to destroy the compromised ingredients. They later asked the director of the FDA’s India office for permission to witness the destruction. He told them it wasn’t necessary.

The investigators spent eight days at the plant. They found significant violations, but left with the sinking feeling that they’d been played—that the perfectly round hole in the glass had been faked; that they’d been diverted from a major glass failure in a reactor they hadn’t been shown. They feared that Ranbaxy would almost certainly resell the contaminated ingredients instead of destroying them, as promised.

The experience led Baker to a resolution: he vowed to get smarter and more aggressive, to pierce the coordinated defenses and denials of plant officials. His determination, and what he would soon uncover, would make him an infamous figure among Indian drug makers and raise questions around the world about their practices.

Baker grew up about as far from a world of global deceit as could be, on a grass seed farm in Lebanon, Oregon, where he was raised by Mennonite parents. His family’s church preached service to others, and the community’s missionary work took his family to remote destinations—indigenous villages down the Amazon River in Colombia and orphanages in the Dominican Republic. Baker spent summers on his neighbor’s farm, driving tractors and combines beneath an unbroken blue sky.

After attending a Christian college in San Diego, where he discovered his love of chemistry, he met a Swedish woman during a European backpacking trip. Together, they settled back in San Diego, where he got a job at a contract research laboratory that tested drugs for manufacturers. He spent hours each day running tests on high-performance liquid chromatography machines. The company seemed more interested in billing hours to its clients than in scrupulous adherence to good manufacturing practices, an attitude that trickled down to the lab. There, minimally supervised chemists used shortcuts to nudge data up or down in order to finish their work quickly, particularly on Friday afternoons when the company brought in a keg and the employees played basketball.

After a year, Baker and his girlfriend moved to China, where he taught English and Western culture to engineering students. On their return to San Diego, they married. Baker wound up at Abbott Laboratories, working as an engineer at the company’s quality assurance laboratory. His real learning began there. His boss assigned him the task of taking a lab with no formal controls and bringing it up to code. This meant creating an entire infrastructure of transparent and verifiable standards. Baker learned GMP from the ground up.

In 2008, while completing a master’s degree in analytical chemistry at San Francisco State University, he joined the FDA. Within a year, he was inspecting plants in the United States. The facilities were largely compliant, and he’d spend weeks at each one, urging companies to perfect the manufacturing process. Only two of his fifty-five U.S. inspections resulted in a warning letter. Afterward, one of the companies ended up moving manufacturing plants to Taiwan, in part to evade so much scrutiny. By mid-2011, with the FDA facing a backlog overseas, Baker volunteered to do some inspections in China, planning to make use of the primitive Mandarin he’d studied in college.

Months later, Baker was asleep in a hotel in Pucheng, a remote town in Fujian province, where he had traveled to inspect a veterinary medicine plant. He awoke at 1:00 a.m. to pounding on his hotel door. Through the peephole, he saw more than a dozen men in street clothes, who turned out to be part of a government security team. Before he could unlatch the door, they busted it open, swarmed in, briefly detained him, and searched his room. The hotel later claimed to have confused him with someone else—though he was almost certainly the only foreigner at the hotel.

The FDA had given him only cursory training for the world of foreign inspections he had entered, which included the admonishment not to accept any gift worth more than $20. Topics like government surveillance, offers of gifts that included gold coins or call girls who materialized in hotel rooms late at night, and how to stay safe in remote towns controlled by the companies whose plants he would be inspecting never came up. As Baker learned to navigate the dicey situations, he found that the long hours, forlorn towns, and unpredictable nature of the inspections energized rather than daunted him. Within months, he agreed to relocate full-time to India.

In late 2008, the FDA opened several foreign outposts, including in India. The move was a response to the adulterated heparin crisis and an acknowledgment of what had long been obvious: the FDA couldn’t hope to regulate plants in a country where it had no permanent presence. But the FDA’s India office had gotten off to a rickety start, with a skeletal crew of eight employees—four in Mumbai and four in New Delhi—tasked with inspecting hundreds of plants across the entire country. Investigator Mike Gavini, who’d been so lenient with Indian companies on his visits there, was among the first to volunteer. He joined the Mumbai group in June 2009.

In Mumbai, the investigators worked out of the building that housed the U.S. Consulate General, where mice chewed through the power cables on their computers. Gavini was housed miles away and commuted on a halting local train. He traveled to manufacturing plants that had never seen an FDA investigator before. He found untrained and uneducated workers, some of them illiterate, traipsing through factories in street shoes. But in his effort not to「indiscriminately [shame]」the country people, as he would later put it, he nudged, cajoled, and guided India’s reluctant factory owners, often giving them green lights to proceed based on their promises to do better. As the companies thrived under his lenient inspections, the number of Indian plants approved to sell drug products to the United States soared. By the time Baker arrived in September 2012, India had become a pharmaceutical-exporting juggernaut.

As Baker started his inspections, he saw what had given India its vaunted reputation: many of the manufacturing plants were new and appeared to be in immaculate condition. The equipment was pristine. But he noticed something else. From the minute the inspections began to the minute they ended, the managers led the FDA investigators around the plants like dogs on a leash. First, a welcome reception. Then, an opening slide show. Guided tours of the facilities. The elaborate show of hospitality amounted to running down the clock.

On his fifth inspection in India, at RPG Life Sciences in Mumbai, Baker took a detour and visited the company’s quality control laboratory, an out-of-the way spot where the plant aggregated its testing data. There, he asked to see all the records related to failing drug products. A nervous manager admitted that the records had been destroyed. This troubled Baker. But as he scrolled through the company’s computer systems, he found some documentation about the products that had not been officially logged. When everything was supposed to be transparently documented, why did the company have an unofficial set of records? He gave the plant a flunking grade of Official Action Indicated. In safe, well-run plants like those he had inspected in the United States, there were not supposed to be any hidden or destroyed records, back doors, or unofficial anything.

In January 2013, his fourth month in India, Baker arrived at a manufacturing plant in Kalyani that made active ingredients for injectable cancer drugs. It was owned by Fresenius Kabi, a German brand-name drug company. The last FDA inspection there four years earlier had only one finding: the company had not correctly documented the chain of custody for the drug samples it was testing. Since his experience at the Toansa plant a month earlier, Baker vowed that he would no longer allow himself to be steered through a manufacturing site. Instead, he would choose where to go and what to inspect. As at RPG, he headed directly to the quality control laboratory—the ultimate back room.

The ostensible purpose of a quality control lab was to audit the test results coming in from the factory floor to ensure that they were unaltered and preserved and that any irregular data was investigated. It was also a last line of defense for a plant interested in detecting, and eliminating, failing drug products.

But the labs could also play a nefarious role, as hubs for manipulating or discarding data that might expose those failing drugs. At the Kalyani lab, instead of asking for data, Baker simply sat down at a computer and began to scrutinize the results from tests done on high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) machines. The bulky machines separated and measured the impurities in a drug sample and displayed them as a series of peaks in a record called a chromatogram.

Toggling back and forth between computer files, Baker discovered something strange. He found the official test, with the result stored in the correct data folder. But in a file called「MISC.,」he saw what looked like earlier tests of the same drug sample, some a day apart, some a month apart. Some of the earlier tests were in ancillary folders, like「MISC.,」or within the proper folder but labeled「DEMO.」This unofficial pretesting and the subsequent retesting were not explained. Nor were there any procedures that permitted it. He figured out that some of the HPLC machines were not officially registered and had not been connected to the plant’s main server. The plant was conducting offline tests.

Baker had uncovered the outlines of a secondary manufacturing operation hidden beneath the surface of the first. The technicians were using the initial hidden tests to get preliminary results, which they used as a guide to tinker with the test settings—adjusting the parameters, the amount of solvent. Then they retested in the plant’s official system to get the desired results. As Baker showed the plant managers point-blank evidence of this malfeasance, they denied his findings. All test results were stored on a central server, one manager insisted, despite all the data Baker put in front of him. As Baker’s inspection progressed, he moved deeper into the plant. He opened an unmarked binder and found scratch paper. A manager snatched it from him and tried to hide it in his pocket. Baker demanded it back. The paper contained notes about manufacturing errors and other problems that needed to be fixed. The hidden notes clearly sidestepped the plant’s obligation to document all quality issues in official records. Baker also noticed foreign particles in a closed vessel used to filter solvents, which the manager denied, claiming it was due to the reflection of light on the glass. When he returned later, the particles had been removed. The manager denied this, asserting that the technicians would not have undertaken「cover-up activities.」

The next day Baker unearthed a report that confirmed his suspicions: it stated that operators had removed the「particulate matter」during his one-hour absence from the processing room. The fragments had come from a deteriorating internal gasket. A statement from the manager was attached:「During the USFDA inspection on 14th January 2013, I panicked and advised my junior to open the equipment and clean it.」

As Baker asked questions, plant managers in India were relaying these to quality managers in Germany, sparking alarm. On the last day of the inspection, Baker faced a stunned and exhausted executive vice president, who’d flown all night from Germany with an entire team to be there when Baker rendered his final verdict. It was evident that the Germans hadn’t known what was happening in their own plant. Baker’s questions had caused them to grill their employees there.

The Germans were forthcoming with Baker and shared what they’d learned in the prior seventy-two hours. The plant’s managing director had overseen a scheme to pretest drug ingredients, preview the results, make secret adjustments to the test settings, and then retest the drug samples until they passed. The director had ordered the HPLC machines on which they’d engineered the pretesting shipped offsite before Baker’s arrival. The plant had reblended failing drug ingredients that had high impurities with higher-quality ingredients until they passed testing. Baker was particularly stunned to learn that the most senior person at the plant had directed these activities.

In the months that followed, Fresenius Kabi launched a probe into its own plant. The findings were grim. The company later admitted to the FDA that it had found unofficial testing, unauthorized blending, false manufacturing records, and the deletion of thousands of records, and that it could not trust any data from the plant, or the compliance of any batches, prior to Baker’s inspection. It was a debacle. To its credit, Fresenius Kabi halted production at the plant, fired the entire management, and recalled all the medicine made with reblended ingredients. As shocking as the situation was, Fresenius Kabi seemed to be a victim of its own poorly managed outsourcing. Had Baker not uncovered the malfeasance, the company might never have discovered what was happening in its own plant.

But Fresenius Kabi wasn’t alone. Brand-name and generic drug companies the world over were snapping up plants in India to make their own active ingredients and drugs at a fraction of the cost. They could rapidly increase their profits, all from saving on the cost of labor and supplies. But Baker suspected that company owners had little insight into what really went on in their own money-saving plants.

Before Baker arrived in India, the FDA’s investigators had long suspected that something was not right. Typically, a compliant manufacturing plant will reject a certain percentage of drug batches for many different reasons. But in India, investigators rarely saw a rejected batch. Somehow, almost all of them passed. Plants were also missing documentation.「I’ve always known [Indian companies] had a hard time keeping paperwork,」one FDA investigator explained.「Their habit and practice is not to keep documentation. They have a chalta-hai attitude,」he said, using a popular phrase in India usually accompanied by a shrug, which means a willingness to accept a less-than-ideal outcome.「In my mind, I knew something had to be not right.」

But with advance notice and only a week’s time at a sprawling plant complex, it was hard to know precisely what was not right. Baker changed that, in part by looking in places where no one else had. As he scoured data, he followed clues: audit trails within the supposedly impermeable software systems had been disabled; tests had been repeated, and then deleted from the official network servers. Through a painstaking forensic effort, he matched up the metadata from deleted tests with the later official tests of the same drug samples. Among hundreds of thousands of tests at any given plant, he followed his instincts: he zeroed in on drug tests he suspected the facility might be faking, and the equipment they might be using to fake them.

Baker became good at finding the HPLC machines that were used for the secret tests and not linked up to a plant’s central software system. In some cases, the company hid them in concealed labs, or even amid other networked machines. But Baker began finding them—largely because he began looking for them. Previously, investigators walked into a laboratory with dozens of HPLC machines and allowed company officials to guide them to a machine, to show them how it worked and what data was being generated. With only five days at a facility and so much to inspect, finding the one or two non-networked machines was nearly impossible. During one inspection, he simply asked lab workers,「Are all these units networked?」One of the lab technicians piped up,「That one is not.」A regional manager tried to cut him off:「Yes, it is.」「No, it is not,」said the employee. Back and forth they went. But Baker had uncovered a stand-alone machine simply by asking for it.

As he worked, other FDA investigators learned from his techniques. The difference was dramatic.「It was like ‘holy shit,’」one FDA employee recalled.「Like you walk into a dark room and suddenly someone just turns on the light. It was shocking.」But it was a fateful inspection two months later—when he discovered the torn batch records in a garbage bag that an employee tried to slip from the plant—that darkened Baker’s view considerably and focused his thinking about the dangers of faked data.

On March 18, 2013, Baker arrived at the main plant of Wockhardt Ltd. in the Waluj area of Aurangabad, two hundred miles east of Mumbai. At the inspection’s opening meeting, the company’s vice president of manufacturing insisted repeatedly to Baker that the plant had only one manufacturing line that it used to make products for the U.S. market. But on the inspection’s second day, Baker recovered a garbage bag that an employee had hurled beneath a stairwell. Inside were torn batch records for the company’s insulin products, which showed that numerous vials contained black particles and had failed visual inspection. As Baker soon discovered, the test results had not been logged into the company’s official system. The manufacturing line on which the company had made the drugs didn’t exist in official records but operated secretly within the plant. In official records, the insulin products passed inspection at a much higher rate than in the deleted batch records. The drugs had been released into Indian and Middle Eastern markets.

Though Baker’s mandate only extended to drugs for the U.S. market, he and his colleague, a microbiologist, continued to follow the clues in the torn records. The next day they found the secret formulation area and unearthed an unofficial「investigation report」into the black particles. The report was not dated or signed but was written to the head of the plant. It made clear that the black particles were「metallic」and had come from damaged heating coils inside a machine used to sterilize vials and cartridges before they were filled with medicine. The blistering heat inside the machine had broken down the coils. They had been repaired, but hadn’t been replaced due to cost. The medicine with the particles had been released to patients.

Baker was staggered. It would have been one thing for the company not to know about the particles, or to accidentally order the drugs released. That would have been shoddy or negligent. But the plant director had ordered the insulin released, with full knowledge that the drugs were potentially lethal to patients. The metallic particles could easily cause an immune-compromised patient to suffer anaphylactic shock and die. Worse yet, Baker discovered that an injectable drug for the U.S. market, adenosine, used to treat an irregular heartbeat, was manufactured on the same secret line, and with the same perilous equipment. Though the unofficial report noted nothing about that drug, Baker was sure the results were no better.

If he’d found such deceit in the United States, it would have triggered a law enforcement raid and, almost certainly, prosecution. Someone would be going to jail. But in India, Baker had no such authority. The only remedy was a regulatory one. He had enough evidence to restrict all the drugs made at Wockhardt’s Waluj plant from entering the U.S. market.

The inspection lasted five days. Baker’s findings—seven major ones—were devastating. They painted a picture of elaborate fraud, extreme hazard, and filth. Plant officials had repeatedly refused to cooperate. One official dumped vials into a drainage sink after Baker inquired about their contents. In the bathroom, about twenty feet from the gowning area for the sterile formulation lab, the urinals lacked drainage piping. As Baker noted in his report,「Urine was found to fall directly onto the floor, where it was collected in an open drain.」The room had an「overwhelming sewer stench,」he wrote. By mid-inspection, both Baker and his colleague had fallen ill, after plant officials gave them unsealed water bottles. They suspected that plant officials had tried to sicken them, to shorten their inspection time.

Word of Baker’s findings, let alone his published inspection report, could wipe millions off the company’s stock. At the inspection closeout meeting, a part of agency protocol, Baker presented his findings to the company’s vice president of manufacturing. The executive demanded, with a menacing glare, that Baker remove the first observation, about the discrepancy between unofficial and official insulin batch records, from his findings. It was a threat.

「I can’t do that, sorry,」Baker responded, getting increasingly nervous about safe passage from the plant as the man stared him down.「Let’s get out of here,」he told his colleague. Neither wanted to get into a company car. The firm was in the middle of nowhere, and a deadly traffic accident would surprise no one, given the number of trucks in the area and the craziness of the roads.

His colleague wanted to mail back the evidence she’d collected rather than travel with it. The company volunteered to call DHL. The next thing they knew, a man dressed in what appeared to be a fake DHL uniform wandered in. A plant employee clearly intended to take her exhibits and disrupt their inspection efforts by any means possible. When Baker demanded to see the man’s DHL van, he left and didn’t return. The FDA investigators were spooked and headed out to the road with all their gear to hail a tuk-tuk, a three-wheeled makeshift cab.

Baker noted in his inspection report:「Due to the threatening behavior and personal safety concerns encountered during this inspection, it is suggested that an inspectional team perform the follow-up inspection with a clear emergency plan in place prior to arrival.」

For Baker, the Wockhardt inspection of March 2013 was a watershed. Amid the hidden laboratories, secretly repeated tests, and altered results, Baker realized that he’d unearthed far more than individual acts of fraud. He had uncovered the larger game being played by India’s generic drug industry: making third-world drugs and selling them at first-world prices. The companies exploited their technological savvy, captive employees and a corporate culture inured to fraud. They were also aided by the FDA’s archaic inspection methods and the West’s dependence on cheap drugs.

Americans had embraced the promise of cheap generics: identical drugs for a fraction of the cost. They assumed that faraway companies were making them with no compromise to quality, in large part because the FDA claimed it was so. But the Indian companies Baker had caught were aiming to make the lowest-quality drugs they could get away with, to make the biggest profits. Without a doubt, the companies could have made perfect medicine. There was no knowledge gap. Their equipment was first-rate. The difference was simply cost. Exacting controls cost about 25 percent more, according to some industry estimates.

To avoid significant up-front costs without a guarantee that their drugs would be approved, the companies pretested everything in secret labs tucked within their manufacturing plants. There, they screened in advance for failing results in order to make secret adjustments to tests. They worked to make their formulations look perfect on paper, regardless of their actual quality. They jury-rigged the results by fiddling with the tests, retesting already proven batches, or even testing the brand-name products instead. Only then would they move the data to the computer system the FDA was going to examine. Until Baker showed up in India, only Ranbaxy had gotten caught—because of the whistleblower Dinesh Thakur.

Baker uncovered all this by breaking the mold of traditional inspections. Instead of roaming the factory floor and checking equipment maintenance records, he focused instead on forensic analysis of the companies’ computer systems, an effort in which he had no formal training. He’d taught himself. It was a risky approach. If he’d spent an entire week combing through computer files and emerged empty-handed, he’d have little time left for the more conventional inspections he was required to do. But Baker had figured out what to look for: in files like「MISC,」「CHRON,」and「DEFAULT」he found tens of thousands of secret tests not entered into the quality systems.

This bogus manufacturing system required the knowledge and participation of hundreds of people, which would be nearly impossible in the United States, where plants faced the constant threat of unannounced inspections and employees had access to more responsive regulators and a chance of becoming legally protected whistleblowers. But in India, if employees challenged the practices, they could face banishment from the industry, if not worse. In order to get a new job, they needed a letter of recommendation from their previous employer. Survival dictated that they leave on good terms. Becoming a whistleblower could be lethal. It was a perfect system for fraudulent manufacturers.

Many of the employees at generic pharmaceutical plants were contract laborers, and at remote plants, some were even poor farmers. They were poorly trained, if at all, and often illiterate, despite the requirement that they document and sign off on activity logs during their shifts. By regulation, they had to be regularly tested on the rules they had to follow. One plant kept all the answers to a test up on the wall, so that the workers just had to look and copy. Most of the employees lived on one meal a day. In their daily lives, many lacked access to a toilet or running water. To Baker, it seemed ludicrous to expect them to walk into a sterile manufacturing plant and suddenly follow all the rules.

Over time Baker refined his inspectional methods, getting better and sharper and quicker at finding hidden fraud, whether concealed in ancillary files, deleted from computer systems, tossed in the trash—or even shipped out of the factory before his arrival. Fear spurred him on. If there was fraud and he failed to find it, no one else would. The finished doses manufactured at Wockhardt and other Indian plants were shipped straight from those factories to American wholesalers and drugstores. People had the right to know what they were taking and to choose what they didn’t want to take. But American patients had no idea of the subterfuge that went into the manufacturing of their low-cost medicine, and the FDA had no plans to tell them. He felt that he was the last person standing between the American patient and companies determined to cheat when given the chance.

Chapter 24

We Are the Champions

AUGUST 2011

Silver Spring, Maryland

As the government’s case against Ranbaxy dragged into its sixth year, the FDA’s criminal investigator, Debbie Robertson, decided to retire at age fifty-five. She had never intended to leave the Ranbaxy case, or turn her back on Dinesh Thakur, until a clear resolution was in sight. But life was too short to battle prosecutors anymore.

Dinesh Thakur felt the loss keenly. He knew that without her, the investigation would probably still be where it had started—with him hiding behind a pseudonym, beseeching the agency to put a stop to Ranbaxy’s crimes. From Gurgaon, Thakur sent Robertson a heartfelt note.「It’s hard for me to put in words the comfort that your steadying hand gave to me during the early years of the investigation,」he wrote.「Whether you realize it or not, our emails and calls helped me through one of the most difficult periods of my life.」He thanked her for the vital role she’d played in making medicine「a little better and safer for all of us.」He also noted that in India, where public health systems lacked regulation and law enforcement was「all but corrupt,」people like her were a rarity:「There are no Special Agents here as conscientious as you.」

The long years of the case had also taken their toll on Thakur’s lawyer, Andrew Beato. Night after night at his home in Bethesda, Maryland, he lay awake, worrying about Thakur’s safety and the solvency of his firm. The case was costing the firm millions of dollars, with two dozen employees toiling on it full-time. If it didn’t settle, Stein Mitchell might not survive the financial hit. Meanwhile, with the case under seal, Beato was the only one Thakur could talk to about it. The nine-and-a-half-hour time difference had led to regular middle-of-the-night talks between the two men. When Beato had trouble returning to sleep, he took late-night walks with his dog, Ziggy, who remained a faithful companion.

Year after year, the two men had waited for a global resolution to the case, one that would bundle Ranbaxy’s criminal, civil, and regulatory liabilities into a single settlement. There was one clear indicator of an actual deal: a commitment from Ranbaxy to put down money. By December 2011, Beato was waiting daily for word from the Justice Department. Would Ranbaxy make that commitment? If so, what would the magic number be? What percentage would his client get? How much would his firm recoup? After all the years of work, could Stein Mitchell do more than break even?

On the expected day, Beato waited for hours to hear from the Justice Department. Just as he was leaving the office, already late for a scheduled dinner with his wife, his phone finally rang. Ranbaxy, through Daiichi Sankyo, had agreed to set aside $500 million, an amount that would resolve all outstanding liabilities. This meant the Japanese company was willing to avoid a trial and take legal responsibility for Ranbaxy’s past acts. Some portion of the settlement, still to be negotiated, would go to Thakur and to Beato’s firm. On December 21, just three weeks after its blockbuster launch of atorvastatin, Ranbaxy issued a press release, confirming it would pay $500 million to settle the case.

「Merry Christmas,」Beato texted Thakur, who was with his family in a cabin in northern India, in the foothills of the Himalayas. Beato then drove home and sideswiped his entire car, from bumper to bumper, against a concrete pillar in his garage, overwhelmed by the cumulative stress. Though the agreement was made in principle, he still wasn’t sure whether the company would sign it.

Weeks later, when the company did sign, officials at the FDA rejoiced.「What a long road!!!」one high-ranking FDA official emailed her colleagues.「I hope they signed in pen so they can’t erase it!」Carmelo Rosa, who led the FDA’s Division of International Drug Quality, sent kind words to Karen Takahashi and Doug Campbell, acknowledging the「countless hours」they’d spent on the case.「You both consistently had only one goal in mind, to protect consumers.」

Even after news of the expected settlement, government and Ranbaxy lawyers continued to haggle over details of the deal, and company executives continued to exasperate regulators. Almost immediately, Ranbaxy executives angled for a meeting with FDA officials. The reason, as an agency lawyer told her colleagues, was that「Ranbaxy management lacks trust that the agency will give the company a fair shake.」This perspective stunned some of the FDA’s higher-ups. Rosa wrote back to the FDA lawyer,「I am just puzzled by the nerve」of Ranbaxy officials「to even suggest the below comments.」

In May 2012, after clashes with his partner, Thakur stepped down from his position as CEO of his business, Sciformix. Meanwhile, his savings had dwindled and Sonal had given up hope for a resolution to the case. He expected that as soon as his role in the Ranbaxy case became public, he would become a pariah in the pharmaceutical industry.

With a final deal not yet inked, Justice Department lawyers continued to ask Beato and Thakur for extensions, which only they had power to grant under the rules of a whistleblower case. By January 3, 2013, Beato responded angrily to a government lawyer who requested another two-month extension.「Why do you need sixty days? You are killing me with my clients and my partners. Dinesh is in a bad financial situation. His family situation is not good either. He is running out of patience. I too have challenges at my firm. I am on a very short leash. If you give Ranbaxy sixty days, they will use all that time.」Though Thakur was willing to agree to the extension, having no other choice if he wanted the case to succeed, Beato urged the government not to tell Ranbaxy that it had sixty more days, since it would only run out the clock again. An assistant U.S. attorney tried to reassure him:「We are at the inches line here.」

Meanwhile, Beato was battling Ranbaxy’s lawyers, who had known for some time that Thakur was the whistleblower. They not only wanted Thakur to agree not to disparage the company publicly; they wanted all his documents back, especially the explosive Self-Assessment Report, which they hoped to bury permanently. Ranbaxy’s lawyers threatened to withhold the funds it would owe to Beato’s firm to cover expenses, as part of the anticipated resolution, unless Thakur returned the documents, which he did. But finally, a settlement hearing appeared in the calendar of Maryland’s U.S. District Court for Monday, May 13, 2013. A real end was in sight.

On the day before the hearing, Thakur woke up early at the Washington Guest Suites Hotel, made his coffee, watched the news, and then FaceTimed with his children, Mohavi and Ishan. This had become his Sunday morning ritual, and he was a man of habit, though there was nothing ordinary about the day.

He headed out into the morning, which was still cool. Steam rose from the manhole covers. Though the blossoms had long fallen from the Japanese cherry trees along the Potomac River, everything else was in bloom and vibrant green as he walked past the rectilinear State Department and toward the Washington Mall. The reflecting pool before the Lincoln Monument barely wavered in the early-morning calm. When he was growing up, the monuments and temples of Hyderabad—like the grand Falaknuma Palace—had filled his imagination. He could not have fathomed that the biggest fight of his life would lead him to Washington, D.C., with the might of the U.S. government as a backdrop.

Thakur had turned to the United States to intervene on behalf of patients around the world, a calculation that he’d made at a dark moment, knowing nothing about the process he might end up triggering. He’d had no idea that so many branches and offices of government—from inspectors general to Medicaid fraud control units to chief counsel and litigation branches—would be needed to make Ranbaxy pay, in some measure, for what it had done. For eight long years, he’d witnessed the creaking and imperfect legal machinery of the U.S. government up close.

At the Lincoln Memorial, he jogged up the steps and stood for some time beneath the towering figure of the seated president. Lincoln, to some extent, had helped to craft Thakur’s journey. The False Claims Act, which his lawyers had used to sue Ranbaxy, was also known as「Lincoln’s Law.」Lincoln had introduced it during the Civil War, to allow whistleblowers to sue on behalf of the government to prevent profiteers from selling defective goods to the Union army. The Gettysburg Address was carved onto one wall of the monument, and as Thakur stood there, he read it several times. It was perhaps no surprise that the nation dedicated to the idea that all men are created equal would be willing to fight for the uniform quality of its medicine. The laws and customs of the United States had offered him an avenue to pursue justice, and by one measurement—with a legal resolution scheduled for tomorrow—he’d almost succeeded.

He took a seat on a bench crossing the Arlington Memorial Bridge, which connected Washington, D.C., to Virginia. He called one of his project managers at Ranbaxy who’d helped him investigate the fraud years earlier. He told him to look out for some news that would break the next day. Then he called Raj Kumar, his former boss who’d set all the events into motion. They had remained in contact through the years. Neither had fared well professionally, though Kumar—who had seemed like CEO material, with his thoughtful demeanor and professional stature—had suffered particularly.

After Ranbaxy, Kumar had headed to Dr. Reddy’s, one of India’s largest generic drug companies, as president of research and development. He hadn’t stayed long. After two years with the company, he returned to Cambridge, where he spoke little about his experience. He was a physician and scientist lost in a world he could never have imagined: one that valued profits above patients. Thakur told him as well to look out for news that was going to break the next day. He wanted to say more but couldn’t.

After making his calls, he returned to the Guest Suites Hotel to do something he’d become far too good at: wait.

On Monday morning, a throng of people stood outside Courtroom 5A at the U.S. Federal Courthouse in Baltimore, Maryland. With the courtroom doors still locked, government prosecutors mingled uneasily in the hallway with Ranbaxy executives and their attorneys. Andrew Beato and his colleagues helped steer Thakur past the crowd to stake out an empty spot. Heads turned as they walked past. Ranbaxy executives already knew who had caused them so much misery. But seeing him and sharing a hallway was a difficult exercise. Thakur, who had never been inside a courthouse before, waited nervously.

Once the doors opened and the crowd filed into the courtroom, a rare smile crept onto Beato’s face. Inside, everyone took their seats. Though flanked by lawyers, Thakur continued to look toward the door, hoping to spot Robertson. And at the last minute, there she was. He smiled and rose to his feet, but Beato gently restrained him.

Judge J. Frederick Motz called the court to order. It was a dark morning for Ranbaxy, and a rare one for any corporation. Though companies paid fines all the time, they were seldom criminally convicted.

The company had agreed to plead guilty to seven federal criminal counts of selling adulterated drugs with intent to defraud, failing to report that its drugs didn’t meet specifications, and making intentionally false statements to the government. To make its case, the government had zeroed in on three drugs that offered the most egregious examples of Ranbaxy’s fraud: the anti-acne drug Sotret, the epilepsy drug gabapentin, and the antibiotic ciprofloxacin. Ranbaxy had agreed to pay $500 million in fines, forfeitures, and penalties. Though it was a far smaller amount than the $3 billion the government started with, it was the most ever levied against a generic drug company.

Judge Motz accidentally called the firm Ranksberry and misread the settlement amount as $500,000. Assistant U.S. Attorney Stuart Berman corrected the judge on the penalty amount, stating that it was $500 million.

Judge Motz cracked,「All the numbers look similar to me.」

The Ranbaxy executive who’d agreed to plead guilty on behalf of the company stood and said that he’d prefer the previous amount, prompting laughter in the courtroom. But when he said,「On behalf of the corporation, I wish to plead guilty,」a silence settled over the courtroom. Motz approved the settlement. No individual executives were held criminally responsible.

And just like that, it was over. Outside of the courtroom, Thakur gave Robertson a hug. The events of the morning seemed to stand for「more than just a court hearing with a company representative,」Beato later recalled. He felt proud of his work on the case, but also hopeful that his firm was helping to clean up an industry on which millions of people depended. This might be a turning point, he thought.

As Beato and Thakur drove back to D.C. in Beato’s Honda Pilot, the Justice Department’s press release hit the wires. Beato’s colleague read aloud from the backseat,「In the largest drug safety settlement to date with a generic drug manufacturer . . .」

「Great!」Beato called out.

As the news rocketed from D.C. to New Delhi, Beato turned on the CD player and blasted「We Are the Champions」by Queen. The men sang along, their windows down. By the time they arrived at Beato’s office, inquiries from the news media were piling up.

It was late that night by the time Thakur called Sonal in India, and the two were able to compare notes. She’d kept the children home from school and stationed a security guard outside the family’s front door. Ranbaxy’s U.S. guilty plea was the lead story in the Indian media, alongside news that Thakur had been awarded $48 million, a percentage of the settlement, for his role in the case. His picture was on television. Sonal’s phone rang continuously with astonished and congratulatory calls from friends and family. Scared and stressed, she was exhausted from trying to explain his role in all of it. The following day, though still afraid, she let the children return to school.

Two days after Ranbaxy’s guilty plea, a 10,000-word article about the case and Thakur’s role in it appeared on Fortune magazine’s U.S. website. The article made public the document that Ranbaxy, and Malvinder Singh, had spent years trying to suppress, both from the public and from Daiichi Sankyo: the Self-Assessment Report that Raj Kumar had shown to the science committee of the board of directors. One question posed by the article was whether Daiichi Sankyo knew the extent and depth of the fraud at Ranbaxy. Interviewed for the article in 2010, Daiichi Sankyo’s head of global strategy, Tsutomu Une, had told Fortune,「I never thought that we were fooled.」

But a week after the article came out, Daiichi Sankyo issued a press release that took clear aim at Malvinder Singh. The company essentially admitted that it had been fooled and stated that「certain former shareholders of Ranbaxy concealed and misrepresented critical information concerning the U.S. DOJ and FDA investigations.」The company announced that it was pursuing「available legal remedies.」In fact, the company had already begun proceedings against Malvinder in the International Court of Arbitration in Singapore.

Thakur spent the following months in a blur of activity. He celebrated at a festive dinner with Robertson, Beato, and others who’d worked on the case. He received a number of whistleblower awards, including the Joe A. Callaway Award for Civic Courage, for which he attended a banquet in Washington, D.C. The award noted his「commitment to drug safety globally, at considerable professional and personal peril to challenge fraudulent pharmaceutical industry practices, beginning with his former employer.」

He returned, partially, to his family. The Thakurs bought a condominium in Tampa with a stunning view of the ocean. Sonal and the children spent a month there over the summer, and the family went to Disney World.「We finally have a life,」Sonal reflected, marveling at the fact that her husband finally seemed relaxed.「Now we can enjoy being together.」

But nothing was that simple. What, exactly, had the Ranbaxy case accomplished? The day Ranbaxy pleaded guilty, Rod Rosenstein, then–U.S. attorney for the District of Maryland, all but acknowledged to a journalist the limits of the case: overseas pharmaceutical manufacturers「self-certify, to a large extent,」that they are following regulations, he said.「If a manufacturer decides to violate [the regulations], it’s very difficult to prove what’s going on.」Given this problem, he acknowledged,「prosecuting individuals would be a more effective deterrent.」But that hadn’t happened.

At the FDA, as far as Doug Campbell could see, the FDA had lost by winning. On the one hand, securing an international consent decree was unprecedented.「Nothing will ever be as big as this,」Campbell acknowledged. But the size of the decree and its strict provisions meant that there were now「three people at the FDA who do nothing but」ensure that Ranbaxy complied. Was that the best use of the FDA’s resources?

The FDA investigator Mike Gavini was scornful of the laborious process that led to Ranbaxy’s guilty plea. By never holding any individuals accountable, the agency「dug up the mountain to kill the mouse,」he said, yet「the mouse got away.」That was true. Many of Ranbaxy’s executives had become experts at data fraud. They had spent years immersed in the intricacies of altering test data, from the research-and-development phase through to commercial manufacturing, all while managing questions from skeptical regulators. They had learned a system that aimed to get drug applications approved at record speed, even before the company had mastered how to make the drug in question.

Now these executives were leaving Ranbaxy in droves, forced out by Daiichi Sankyo and the upheaval of Ranbaxy’s guilty plea, and getting jobs throughout the industry, taking their colleagues and their skill sets with them. To the regulators, investigators, and investigators who’d worked on the Ranbaxy case, this company diaspora meant one thing: the best way to figure out where they’d find the next fraud was to follow former Ranbaxy executives and see where they landed.

Chapter 25

Crashing Files

JANUARY 2013

Canonsburg, Pennsylvania

At the glass-walled headquarters of Mylan Laboratories, the brash former Ranbaxy chemist Rajiv Malik became executive director of the board, in addition to his role as president of the company. His ascent surprised former colleagues. It was rare enough for a chemist with a background in research and development to reach a U.S. executive suite. To do so from Malik’s background—as a scientist trained in Punjab who had worked only at Indian companies—was extraordinary. But Malik, with his perspicacious mind and buoyant manner, hand always outstretched in greeting, had never been an ordinary bench scientist. He was known for「amazing vision and the willpower to achieve the impossible,」as a former associate put it, and as someone who「never fails the mission provided to him by the management.」But now, as the same colleague noted,「he is capable of setting his own missions—as he himself is the management.」

His latest mission was to oversee Mylan’s biggest foreign acquisition yet: an upcoming $1.6 billion purchase of Agila Specialties, a sterile injectable drug maker based in India with nine manufacturing plants worldwide. As Mylan grew, Malik spoke often of a larger, and more complex, mission: to「raise the bar」at every Mylan plant globally and ensure that the company made the same quality of medicine for every world market. This was easier said than done. Malik needed to ensure that India’s「low bar,」as he put it, did not lower the quality at Mylan or remake the company in the image of his former employer, Ranbaxy, which he called a「beautiful story gone sad.」

For decades, Mylan had enjoyed a reputation as a standard-bearer, a company「on the right side of the story,」as Heather Bresch, who became the company’s CEO in 2012, put it. But as companies looked to buy factories where labor was cheap and oversight less onerous, the story—and being on the right side of it—became more complicated. Publicly, Mylan played a leading role in dragging a reluctant industry toward improvement. When Bresch returned from a global trip by way of Australia, where she visited a company plant, she discovered that the FDA had not been to inspect the plant in over a decade. Though the number of foreign facilities making drugs for the United States was「going through the roof,」she said, the inspections lagged far behind those at plants on American soil.

So Bresch—the glamorous, stiletto-heel-wearing daughter of U.S. senator Joe Manchin—began an unlikely campaign to tackle the inspection disparity. She sought to convince her colleagues and competitors to pay fees to the FDA in order to be inspected more. That seemed like a tall order. Why would any company part with money to place themselves under greater scrutiny? But Bresch had a convincing argument. The fees could go not just toward increasing inspections overseas, but also toward speeding up application reviews, thus reducing the notorious backlogs that slowed down approval.

The result, the Generic Drug User Fee Amendment (GDUFA), was signed into law in January 2012. The achievement, largely credited to Bresch, enhanced Mylan’s reputation for being on the right side of the story. Ideally, GDUFA would allow the FDA to more effectively regulate a global industry, while also leveling the playing field for disadvantaged American companies, which faced far more scrutiny at their plants in the United States. The result could be higher-quality drugs everywhere, said Bresch:「I still am very hopeful and optimistic that we’re raising the bar across the world.」

But raising the bar was not simply a matter of law and regulation. It often required a transformation of company culture, something that Mylan soon found itself confronting, from both within and without.

In June 2013, the FDA scheduled an inspection at a sterile injectable plant in Bangalore, Karnataka, which Mylan had announced it would purchase from Agila just months earlier. There are few inspections more complex than those of a sterile injectable plant. Ideally, the FDA should have sent a team to the Bangalore plant that included a microbiologist expert in aseptic techniques. But the FDA—seeking to find someone, anyone, to travel to the far-flung site and looking to spread the pain among its employees—tapped an investigator from the Buffalo, New York, resident post.

The investigator had spent his time principally in upstate New York, where he’d inspected a dairy farm and a cow veterinarian, among other assignments. Those inspections didn’t have life-or-death implications. The Bangalore plant was a different matter entirely: Americans could die if he overlooked something. To his credit, he was terrified. In a stroke of luck, a more experienced investigator was asked to accompany him: Peter Baker. The two men arrived on June 17 and stayed for ten days.

At an aseptic manufacturing plant, every motion and action must be considered and controlled for its impact on the sterile environment. In Bangalore, the investigators found a dangerously sloppy plant. They discovered a used mop left haphazardly near a conveyor belt with open vials. Untrained workers moved rapidly rather than in the slow and deliberate manner required, thereby「creating the potential for disruptions of the unidirectional air flow,」Baker noted in his report. Key pieces of equipment were stored in nonsterile areas, then never resanitized before use. In the bathroom, several employees failed to wash their hands after using the toilet.

But the gloves really told the story of the plant. The men saw technicians wearing gloves that were flaking and had pinholes, exposing the medicine they’d been working on to contamination. Inside a storage closet, the investigators found「crushed insects」in a shipping box for the gloves. Additional gloves stored there were cracking and discolored. Though Baker had flagged the problem on his fourth day in the plant, technicians were still using the corroded gloves at inspection’s end.

It was a disaster, one that grew as the FDA found serious problems in two more Agila facilities. In a little over two years, the FDA had censured three of Mylan’s plants, two originally owned by Agila, for failing to ensure a sterile environment. The problems at the plants—which also made active ingredients for Pfizer and GlaxoSmithKline—resonated across the globe. But they landed with the heaviest thud in Canonsburg, Pennsylvania, at Mylan’s corporate headquarters, where Rajiv Malik fumed over the problems he’d inherited.

「When we bought Agila, there were six sites [in India] approved by FDA, approved by ANVISA [the Brazilian regulator], approved by every agency in the world,」as Malik would later explain.「Pfizer. GSK. It was state-of-the-art, everything robotic, video cameras. . . . Six months there, we got slapped with a warning letter.」The topic then turned, perhaps inevitably, to Peter Baker and his aggressive methods.「He created an atmosphere of panic,」Malik contended, one in which even the workers’ fear and silence were held against them. Nonetheless, Mylan’s response was thorough, Malik recounted. The company took 119 of the 199 batches of drugs potentially impacted by the flaking gloves off the market and tested them. They were free from particulates, and the company turned this data over to the FDA, he said.

By then, the company had hired one of the FDA’s top officials, Deb Autor, as its senior vice president of strategic global quality and regulatory policy.「If I hadn’t been 100 percent satisfied that Mylan was going to do the right thing, I would have walked out the door,」Autor later said. In the Agila case, said Malik,「We shut down three plants for almost three years.」The actions showed Mylan at its best, he stated: transparent and committed to quality. It was the spirit of the white glove, the dust-free machine, and the「do it right」ethos, all rolled into one.

But in fact, Mylan was changing, and not for the better, some of its employees believed. Internally, as Malik moved with laser-like focus to bring drugs to market, employees in both India and the United States began to experience a shift in the company. Malik and his deputies seemed to prize speed above all else, said several former employees. Those who insisted on adhering to the well-articulated rules of good manufacturing practices felt sidelined, said one senior executive who resigned.「When you’re rigid,」he said,「you’re tagged as being slow.」

Under Malik’s leadership, Mylan-India became a hothouse of productivity. Malik’s own compensation was based, in part, on the number of applications Mylan filed with global regulators. Year after year, he and his team exceeded targets. With their development pipeline full and their laboratories humming with favorable data, they often filed dozens more applications than expected by the company. But employees—some of whom allegedly quit after being asked to tamper with data—were left to wonder: had Malik’s handpicked team left behind their Ranbaxy training—or brought it to Mylan instead?

Mylan’s reputation as a standard-bearer would soon take a spectacular hit. In August 2016, at the height of the U.S. presidential election and just before the nation’s children returned to school, Mylan dove headfirst into the wrong side of a different story—and suddenly became notorious as a company doing the wrong thing. It hiked the price of its EpiPen—an injectable form of epinephrine often used by children with life-threatening allergies—by more than 400 percent.

Mylan came to own the EpiPen in 2007, when it bought the generic drug division of Merck KGaA. After making some innovations in the auto-injectable device, Mylan began selling the drug at $100 for a pack of two. After the FDA rejected a competitor’s generic version, owing to design flaws, Mylan had the field to itself and hiked the price. By 2016, EpiPen’s listed price was $600. Suddenly parents who needed to buy their children enough EpiPen packs to cover home, school, and their backpacks—found themselves with a prohibitively high out-of-pocket expense.

Outrage built quickly on social media. The hashtag #Epigate gained traction, as did a public narrative about Bresch and her soaring salary. Bresch had made $2.4 million in 2007. But by 2015, she had made almost $19 million. And owing to the company’s 2014 decision to incorporate in Ireland to lower its taxes, she and the other executives had made a great deal more: in 2014, both she and Malik earned over $25 million each in total compensation. By then, the EpiPen provided roughly 10 percent of the company’s revenue.

Overnight, Bresch became the face of pharmaceutical greed. She was compared in the media to Martin Shkreli, the former hedge-fund manager turned Big Pharma CEO who’d raised the price of a decades-old drug to treat AIDS infections by 5,000 percent. As a wave of public condemnation washed over Bresch, she did herself few favors. In a disastrous CNBC interview, she declared of the price hikes,「No one’s more frustrated than me.」She then went on to blame others in the supply chain and proposed a national conversation about the broken health care system. The effect was more Marie Antoinette than Florence Nightingale.

Mylan struggled to contain the PR debacle. It offered discount cards. It explained that it would soon market a generic version of the EpiPen at half price. It gave lengthy explanations of byzantine drug pricing and all the middlemen who took a cut. But to the public, which couldn’t follow why a generic drug company was alone in selling an overpriced drug in the first place, none of this made any sense.

Suddenly, a history of the company’s past scandals spooled out before the press. There was Bresch’s MBA. In December 2007, the Pittsburgh Post-Gazette uncovered that Bresch had not completed necessary coursework for the degree, but West Virginia University had altered her transcripts and awarded it retroactively once Bresch’s father, Joe Manchin, became governor. An uproar ensued, and in 2008 the university revoked her degree. There were allegations that Executive Chairman Robert Coury frequently misused the company jet to fly his son, a musician, to gigs around the country. There had been a shady land deal, involving a company vice chairman, for the property where Mylan had built its new headquarters.

But the EpiPen scandal was in a league of its own. Before long, there were congressional inquiries, class-action lawsuits, and investigations by multiple attorneys general into antitrust violations. On September 21, 2016, an unhappy-looking Bresch found herself grilled under oath in a nationally televised inquiry by the House Committee on Oversight and Government Reform. The lawmakers demanded to know why she’d turned her back on families who could no longer afford the drug.

But even as all this played out, a far more consequential set of developments—ones that raised questions about the company’s integrity and the quality of its medicine—had been unfolding far from public view.

About a year earlier, a former Mylan employee arrived at the FDA’s headquarters in Silver Spring, Maryland, and sat down with a group of senior FDA officials. Confidentially, he made specific allegations: that under Rajiv Malik’s leadership, Mylan’s research and development center in Hyderabad had become a hub for data fraud that had disseminated its methods of falsification throughout Mylan’s Indian operations. The whistleblower alleged that people who now held key leadership positions at Mylan, among them former Ranbaxy employees, were using their skills at data manipulation.

The Mylan whistleblower identified specific applications for drugs that were due to be launched into the American market. He claimed that in order to generate passing results for some drug products, Mylan had switched samples from commercial batches, which were less stable, with samples from smaller pilot batches that were easier to control. But perhaps the most surprising allegation he made was that the Mylan team had evolved its fraudulent methods to evade detection. Instead of deleting manipulated data from the plant’s software systems—which would have left a trail of metadata that FDA investigators like Peter Baker could uncover—plant managers were deliberately corrupting the data they wanted to hide. This was considered a better way to evade investigators.

Though the FDA officials found the whistleblower’s claims credible, remarkably they did nothing for about a year. Mylan seemed to exist within a charmed circle of protection at the FDA. Not only was its chief executive officer the daughter of a U.S. senator, but now one of its top regulatory executives, in charge of overseeing the company’s relationship with the FDA, was the former FDA official Deb Autor.

In July 2016, the whistleblower jolted the FDA officials by sending an email that expressed his dismay over their inaction. He made clear that they were accountable for what happened to American patients. He suggested that the company’s political connections and the revolving door between the FDA and Mylan had been factors in the FDA’s passivity.

「Honestly—I had supreme faith & trust in the agency’s approach—towards bringing those to justice who commit fraud,」he wrote.「However, I learn that Mylan’s strategy of providing employment to FDA members has been working very well.」He went on:「Perhaps, the agency awaits a definitive tragedy to occur on U.S. soil due to substandard generic drug products not meeting the safety & efficacy standards」(as it has been the case in Africa—where the anti-retroviral drugs aren’t showing adequate efficacy).」

He speculated that something or someone was clearly blocking the FDA from inspecting Mylan:「This kind of bureaucratic scenario can be considered as ‘common practice’ in a country like India—but I certainly had much higher expectations from U.S. government agency—which are known for higher ethical standards & higher moral values.」

His unusually pointed note of admonishment set off a desperate scramble inside the agency. Two months later, on September 5—about two weeks before Bresch took her seat on the witness stand in front of Congress—an FDA investigator turned off the main thoroughfare in Nashik, India, onto a dusty side road amid wandering goats and chickens and arrived at Mylan’s flagship Indian plant. This time, the investigator had come unannounced.

Mylan’s Nashik plant is a five-hour drive from Mumbai, past burning farm fields and desolate road stops. Despite the forlorn spot, the plant there is both massive and cutting-edge. It sprawls over twenty-two acres and has the capacity to make 8 billion doses of drugs a year for every world market, from Australia and Africa to the United States.

Over the course of nine days, the FDA investigator who arrived there found evidence that the plant’s software system was riddled with error messages showing「instrument malfunction,」「power loss,」and「connection to chromatography system lost.」Plant managers had apparently conducted no investigation into the repeated crashes. They had simply retested the drugs after receiving the error messages, leading the FDA to suspect that the crashes had been intentional, just as the whistleblower had alleged. It appeared that, instead of deleting unwelcome data, which would have left a trail of clues, Mylan had crashed its system, as though technicians had literally pulled the computer plug from the wall. The technique was so notable that FDA officials gave it a name:「crashing files.」

Within two months, three investigators arrived unannounced at Mylan’s plant in Morgantown, West Virginia. There, they were stunned to find what looked like suspect data practices. The technicians had been pre-injecting samples into the HPLC machines, prior to the official tests, as though to get a forecast of the results. There were also instances where drug batches had yielded failing or aberrant results and the analysts did not investigate, as required. Instead, they retested the drugs and got passing results, raising questions about what manipulations they may have made.

To the FDA’s compliance officials, the crashed software, the pretesting, and the failure to investigate aberrant results all smacked of deception. In correspondence, they demanded answers from Mylan, noting that the error messages at Nashik「raise questions regarding the integrity and reliability of data generated.」That perception posed a grave risk to the West Virginia company. If the FDA made a final determination that quality problems were systemwide, not just isolated to one plant, the penalties and sanctions could escalate dramatically. The FDA’s suspicions also threatened Mylan’s image as a company of integrity, a reputation it had cultivated assiduously, down to its glass-walled headquarters and partly transparent business cards. Despite its political clout, Mylan risked being lumped in with other global generic drug companies that could not be trusted to run a clean laboratory.

In a later meeting with a journalist, Mylan officials played down the FDA’s findings, explaining that the ominous term of「data integrity」lapses actually encompassed any number of simple regulatory shortcomings. Said R. Derek Glover, Mylan’s head of global quality systems and compliance,「We have found no evidence that any of this was associated with data fraud.」

Mylan responded forcefully to the Nashik and Morgantown inspections. In a series of meetings, calls, and correspondence with the FDA, the company’s top lawyers and well-connected executives pledged full cooperation and transparency. They flooded the agency with data and analyses intended to prove that the company had thorough quality systems and was prepared to investigate itself.

In January 2017, Mylan sent a lengthy, confidential letter to the agency, attempting to explain the reason for the high number of error messages at the Nashik plant—forty-two over a seven-day period. The company offered no single explanation. The messages were「not related to the disconnection of the Ethernet cable or power cord.」It then added:「It is not evident through retrospective review whether these disconnection events were caused by manual intervention of cables (accidental knocking of cables), or through an electronic loss of signal.」For a different error that appeared 150 times over seven days, it gave a partial explanation: some of its software settings had led to「unintended consequence of a number of repetitive error messages.」In a confidential letter the following month, Mylan assured the agency that「there was no resultant impact to the integrity and appropriateness of the results considered for batch release decisions.」

The FDA didn’t buy it. On April 3, 2017, it gave the Nashik plant a warning letter, effectively freezing agency review of the site’s applications until the company made corrections. The letter noted that Mylan’s quality system「does not adequately ensure the accuracy and integrity of data.」It made clear that the agency harbored ongoing suspicions about the error messages:「Your quality unit did not comprehensively address the error signals or determine the scope or impact of lost or deleted data until after these problems were reviewed during our inspection.」The company’s share price fell 2 percent on the news.

Less than three weeks after the warning letter at Nashik, Malik and six other Mylan officials sat down with nineteen displeased FDA bureaucrats at the agency’s headquarters to try to fend off regulatory action against its Morgantown, West Virginia, plant. As agency officials grilled them about why laboratory technicians had failed to investigate anomalous results and instead had retested the drugs and recorded passing results, Malik’s team found itself facing a larger question from agency officials: what had happened to Mylan? The regulators said that they were「stunned」by the lapses at Morgantown, found the practices「egregious,」and questioned whether the company was being「transparent at all of its sites.」One FDA bureaucrat put it bluntly:「The FDA is questioning how such violations could have ever happened at the Morgantown facility in light of Mylan’s broader quality culture.」

It fell to Malik, who both reflected the transformation of Mylan and had helped to lead it, to argue that the underlying values of Mylan and Morgantown had not changed.「Mylan’s philosophy of quality,」he explained to the officials,「is that there is no compromise on data integrity or patient safety.」Aiming to disentangle the Morgantown site from the agency’s scrutiny, he explained that the plant was unique「as the business started there and from day one the facility was founded upon the principle of integrity.」Ultimately, the firm blamed the retesting without investigation on an old standard operating procedure that had needed updating.

This time the company’s approach appeared to work. In May 2017, the FDA’s director of the Office of Manufacturing Quality, Tom Cosgrove, made a controversial decision over the strenuous objections of staff in two separate FDA divisions: he downgraded the investigators’ negative findings at Morgantown, from Official Action Indicated to Voluntary Action Indicated. He also chose to send an untitled letter to the company that was not visible to the public—the second time in two years that Cosgrove had downgraded findings against Mylan and concealed the agency’s response.

In an email to FDA colleagues, Cosgrove acknowledged their view that the company’s retesting practices were「more widespread and that Mylan’s investigation was insufficient.」But he defended his decision:「Mylan has been responsive and forthcoming, and I have no reason to believe they will not remediate voluntarily.」

The move briefly got Mylan’s Morgantown plant off the hook of intensifying agency scrutiny. But it did little to resolve the storm brewing there. In early 2018, a whistleblower from inside the plant reached out to the FDA to report deteriorating conditions, from understaffing to cleaning lapses. The whistleblower claimed that Mylan’s management, instead of working proactively to remedy problems, was more focused on creating a「facade of documents」to fend off the FDA, according to an agency memo that detailed the allegations. The whistleblower described how a team of employees from India was brought in to rapidly close a backlog of company investigations at Morgantown, and employees there were instructed not to question their work. Mylan had developed an「embedded culture」that permitted fraud, the whistleblower claimed, an observation shared by some former employees.

From the Sea Lounge in Mumbai’s most famous hotel, the Taj Mahal Palace, a former Mylan chemist looked out to Mumbai Harbor and the 1920 triumphal arch known as the Gateway of India. But he took no pleasure in the view. Even surrounded by silk pillows and attentive waiters, he was distraught. He was there in secrecy, to describe to a journalist how Mylan had moved dozens of drug applications swiftly through the system, using「cooked」data at each step of the manufacturing process. This data manipulation occurred under the leadership of Rajiv Malik and a group of his associates, the chemist explained. His team built up the company’s India operations into a powerhouse central to the company’s success, along the way transforming—and corrupting—the West Virginia company, said the chemist.

Malik’s team used an array of deceptive methods to hasten approval of critical products, he said. They did「what’s needed」to make the development data pass and「managed」the manufacturing of the submission batches. They generated the bioequivalence data by switching the samples, if necessary.「Wise people」prepared the submission packages to regulatory agencies. Post-approval manufacturing was「taken care」of by specialists. Global experts, held in esteem by regulatory agencies, were consulted to「bless」the packages, but given only partial information. All of these interventions served to「short-circuit」the timeline typically required to develop and manufacture a generic drug.

At the Sea Lounge, the chemist described the well-oiled machinery of industrial-scale data manipulation, with teams from research and development deployed at each manufacturing step to manage the failing data. Malik had bracketed every manufacturing system with his people, who moved entirely in sync.「One person starts a sentence, the other person can complete it,」he explained, adding that Malik’s people could execute his directions with very few instructions.「The command does not need to be very specific.」The goal is to get the drugs to market as quickly as possible, said the chemist, and those working under Malik do everything they can to make that happen.

At each step, he said, they used workarounds, from hidden equipment to tinker with tests to secret substitutions. When the process got transferred to the plant and was scaled up, the larger batches would start to fail.「Then the phone call goes, no email,」said the chemist.「You send a guy from analytical to QC [quality control], they manage the data. The data is clean.」

Then comes commercialization, or large-scale manufacturing, which is far harder to control.「Commercial batches will fail on stability,」he said, and again, the solution was data manipulation.「You play with parameters so impurities don’t show up.」At each step,「people come from R&D to show how to fix the issue.」

It was under this system that the data for a number of products—submitted to the FDA for approval—were manipulated, which the chemist said hastened his departure from the company.

Mylan’s general counsel Brian Roman said that the company「absolutely and vehemently」denied allegations of data manipulation. He pointed out that the FDA had not confirmed any such activity at the company.「If someone is telling you they have evidence that we switched samples,」he told a journalist,「my belief is, they’re lying to you.」He added that anyone leveling such a claim was obligated to「make a report that’s capable of being investigated.」But in fact, the chemist had. After his resignation, he detailed his allegations in writing to senior managers.

At the Sea Lounge, the chemist explained that the FDA investigator Peter Baker「got the exact pulse of India,」by uncovering the subterranean system of testing that paralleled the official one.「It always comes from the top down.」He cried silently, tears rolling down his face.「What’s going on in the industry is very, very, very dirty.」

Chapter 26

The Ultimate Testing Laboratory

FEBRUARY 7, 2013

Kampala, Uganda

At the Mulago National Referral Hospital, Dr. Brian Westerberg, a Canadian surgeon on a volunteer mission, examined a very sick thirteen-year-old boy. He had a fever and chills and was vomiting. Fluid oozed from his ear canal, the likely source of infection. Westerberg suspected bacterial meningitis, though he couldn’t confirm his diagnosis because the CT scanner had broken down again. The boy was given intravenous ceftriaxone, a broad-spectrum antibiotic that Westerberg believed would kill the bacteria and reduce the swelling around his brain. He was confident that the boy would be cured.

For the sixteen years that Westerberg had worked volunteer missions at the Mulago hospital, scarcity had been the norm. The throng of patients usually exceeded the 1,500 allotted beds. Running water was once cut off when the debt-ridden hospital was unable to pay its bills. For years, medicine had been scarce, forcing Westerberg to bring his own drug supplies from Canada. But more recently, low-cost generics had become widely available through the local government and international aid agencies, a hopeful development that Westerberg saw as a step in the right direction.

But after four days of treatment, the boy was still sick. His headache was even worse, and the「draining ear」had turned into a pussy, boil-like mass. Westerberg prepped for surgery, assuming that he would have to slice into the child’s ear and scoop out the infected tissue. Right before the procedure, the boy had a seizure. The hospital’s CT scanner had started to work again, so Westerberg sent the boy for an urgent scan, which revealed small abscesses in his brain, likely caused by the infection.

A hospital neurosurgeon looked at the images and confidently told Westerberg,「We’re not going to operate.」He was sure that the swelling and abscesses would abate with effective antibiotic treatment. This confused Westerberg. They had already treated the boy with antibiotics—the intravenous ceftriaxone—and it had failed to beat back his infection. Westerberg’s confusion deepened when his colleague suggested that they switch the boy to a more expensive version of the same drug.「Why swap one ceftriaxone for another?」Westerberg wondered. But he would soon learn that the hospital’s drug supply was plagued by a phenomenon that Ugandan doctors knew all too well.

In a world of scarcity, Africa was saturated with Indian- and Chinese-made generic drugs that too often didn’t work. Doctors throughout the continent had adjusted their medical treatment in response, sometimes doubling or tripling recommended doses to produce a therapeutic effect. Many hospitals kept a stash of what they called「fancy drugs」—either brand-name drugs or higher-quality generics—to treat patients who should have recovered after a round of treatment but didn’t.

Westerberg’s colleagues were prepared with a backup stash of ceftriaxone purchased outside the hospital. They swapped in the more expensive version and added two more drugs to the boy’s treatment plan. They did not operate fully, but Westerberg did clean out the draining ear. The treatment might have been effective, but was administered too late. The boy never recovered. On the eleventh day of his treatment, he was declared brain-dead.

The Ugandan doctors were not surprised by the death of the thirteen-year-old boy. Their patients frequently died when treated with drugs that should have saved them. Even though doctors turned to backup reserves of「fancy」drugs, there were not enough to go around, making every day an exercise in pharmaceutical triage.「We are tired, honestly,」as one doctor in western Uganda put it. She found it hard to keep track of which generics were safe and which were not to be trusted.「It’s anesthesia today, ceftriaxone tomorrow, amoxicillin the next day.」

Each time Peter Baker inspected a new manufacturing plant, his sole job was to focus on the drugs headed for the U.S. market and protect Americans who would be taking them. But as he documented fraud and manufacturing failures in India’s plants, he noticed with increasing alarm that the drugs bound for developing markets were even worse than those headed for the United States.

In May 2013, he arrived at a manufacturing plant south of Hyderabad, run by an Indian generic company. There, he saw vials of a chemotherapy drug, gemcitabine, which had improperly sealed caps and therefore weren’t sterile.「What the heck did you do with this?」he asked officials. The answer:「We sent it to Africa.」At another plant, he saw drug ingredients that the FDA had restricted from import into the United States and asked where those were headed. The Ukraine, he was told. He passed that information to the Ukrainian government but didn’t hear back.

Baker slowly began to see a map of the world similar to the one that had so shocked Dinesh Thakur when he uncovered it at Ranbaxy. Companies claimed that they produced the same high-quality drugs for every world market. At Ranbaxy, Thakur exposed this as a lie by uncovering fraudulent data. Baker was looking at the actual medicine. At plant after plant, he found the most blatant fraud and the most egregious quality lapses in the manufacture of drugs bound for the least-regulated markets: Africa, eastern Europe, Asia, and South America. One reason he rarely saw a rejected batch in India was that, no matter how evidently defective the drug, there was always some world market where it could be sent.

What Thakur and Baker had stumbled into was not a glitch or exception but rather common practice in the generic drug industry. The unequal production standards had interchangeable names:「dual-track,」「multi-tier,」or「row A/row B production.」Companies routinely adjusted their manufacturing quality depending on the country buying their drugs. They sent their highest-quality drugs to markets with the most vigilant regulators and their worst drugs to countries with the weakest review. In an industry with slim margins, companies slashed costs by using lower-quality ingredients, fewer manufacturing steps, and lower standards, then sold those drugs in poorly regulated countries.

Racism undoubtedly played a role, as it had at Ranbaxy when the medical director said of the poor-quality AIDS drugs bound for Africa,「Who cares? It’s just blacks dying.」But at root, a cold calculation drove the disparate standards: companies could make their cheapest drugs for markets where they would be least likely to get caught. When asked, the companies insisted that they made drugs of different standards because quality standards differed from market to market. But Patrick H. Lukulay, former vice president of global health impact programs for the USP, the world’s top pharmaceutical standard-setting organization, called that argument「totally garbage.」For any given drug, he said,「There’s only one standard, and that standard was set by the originator,」meaning the brand-name company that developed the product.

Baker had no control or authority over the drugs sold to patients anywhere outside the United States. But he wrote up his findings in his inspection reports nonetheless. Those reports became a roadmap of warnings for regulators in other countries, some of whom followed up on his findings. Baker was documenting the tip of a much larger public health crisis. He couldn’t be sure what was happening to patients in other countries, but the generics pouring into the developing world were of such low quality that he assumed the consequences had to be dire, nothing short of a「ticking time bomb.」

In Uganda, Dr. Westerberg was shaken by his newfound knowledge that patients were dying after taking substandard drugs. He flew back to Canada and teamed up with a Canadian respiratory therapist, Jason Nickerson, who’d had similar experiences with bad medicine in Ghana. They decided to test the chemical properties of the generic ceftriaxone that had been implicated in the Ugandan boy’s death.

Westerberg’s colleague brought him a vial of the suspect ceftriaxone from the pharmacy at the Mulago hospital. The drug had been made in China’s Hebei province by an international drug company, CSPC Zhongnuo Pharmaceutical, which also exported to the United States and other developed markets. But when they tested the ceftriaxone at Nickerson’s lab, it contained less than half the active drug ingredient stated on the label.

Both Westerberg and Nickerson were shocked. At such low concentration, the drug was basically useless and would not have cured a single patient, said Nickerson. He and Westerberg published a case report in the CDC’s Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report. Although they couldn’t say with certainty that substandard ceftriaxone had killed the boy, their report offered compelling evidence that it had.

CSPC Zhongnuo Pharmaceutical had a track record of quality failures. In 2009, Jackson Lauwo, a professor at the University of Papua New Guinea’s School of Medicine and Health Sciences, grew concerned about the quality of drugs in the country and contacted a pharmaceutical scientist in Frankfurt, Germany, Jennifer Dressman, to ask if she would be willing to test drug samples in her lab. She agreed to help, so Lauwo collected samples of the anti-infective drugs amodiaquine and amoxicillin made by different manufacturers from five registered pharmacies in the capital city of Port Moresby. He brought them to Dressman’s lab. After several months the results were in: every single sample failed quality evaluations.

Three of the fourteen samples were counterfeit: entirely fake pills made by criminals. The rest were substandard, meaning that they appeared to have been manufactured by legitimate firms intentionally making a low-quality product. One such sample came from CSPC Zhongnuo Pharmaceutical.

Even the company’s drug products for the U.S. market were of poor quality. Since 2013, the FDA has cited the company four times for quality violations. Peter Baker inspected the company’s plant northeast of Beijing and found blatant data manipulation. He discovered that failed tests were routinely deleted and samples were retested until they yielded passing results.

The United States has the resources to send investigators abroad. Poorer countries like Uganda and Papua New Guinea typically import drugs from the lowest bidder and don’t have the regulatory apparatus to check quality. Minimal oversight by countries buying the drugs, coupled with weak laws and poor regulation in countries manufacturing them, have allowed dual-track production to flourish.

India’s regulators, for example, won’t take legal action unless a company is making a drug with less than 70 percent of the required active ingredient, which is far below the acceptable standards set by the FDA, the World Health Organization, and other major drug regulators. Dual-track production is not illegal in India, said Anant Phadke of the All India Drug Action Network, an Indian organization that works to increase access to essential medicines.「Whether morally this is correct or not is open for interpretation.」

The same year Westerberg treated the boy in Uganda, Dr. Sean Runnels, an American anesthesiologist from Utah, arrived in Rwanda to work in the country’s national health care system. One of the first things he noticed was that many generic drugs supplied by Rwanda’s health care program「simply didn’t work.」Back then, the country did not have an official drug agency to test the medicine it was buying and could not verify its quality.

At the University Hospital of Kigali, in the nation’s capital, Runnels realized that he could no longer count on anesthesia to put patients to sleep and on antibiotics to fend off infections. He watched as new mothers, after giving birth by cesarean section, succumbed to bacterial infections despite taking a full course of antibiotics. In lieu of effective medication, Runnels and his colleagues resorted to surgery, flushing out women’s abdomens and cutting out infected tissue in a last-ditch effort to save their lives.「Very few of them survived,」he said.

Runnels was initially flabbergasted to discover such variable drug quality, but like the doctors in Uganda, his Rwandan colleagues were accustomed to the problem and had a system to address it. If a generic wasn’t working, they tried to find another version produced by a different manufacturer, or they switched to another type of drug. If neither option was available, they increased the dose of the substandard generic in an effort to achieve a therapeutic effect.

Wealthy patients were lucky. They could escape the quagmire by purchasing brand-name medicine from private pharmacies. The difference was astonishing.「As soon as you saw a brand-name drug, those are the patients that would suddenly get better,」Runnels said. It was a phenomenon so pronounced that he started calling it「the Lazarus Effect,」after the biblical character who rose from the dead.

Over the past decade, Africa’s pharmaceutical problems changed dramatically. Previously, the continent’s drugs came largely from more-developed countries, through donations and small purchases. The biggest problems were the high costs and resulting scarcity. By 2004, Indian drug reps started arriving throughout Africa, offering cheap generics. In Ghana, though the initial feeling was positive, the result was not, recalled Dr. Anita Appiah, coordinator of community and institutional care for the National Catholic Health Service. Africa became an avenue「to send anything at all,」said Professor Kwabena Ofori-Kwakya, head of the Pharmaceutics Department at the Kwame Nkrumah University of Science and Technology in Kumasi, Ghana. The adverse impact on health has been「astronomical,」he said. The poor quality has affected every type of medication.

Dr. Gordon Donnir, a psychiatrist who heads the Psychiatry Department at the Komfo Anoyke Teaching Hospital in Kumasi and treats middle-class Ghanaians in his private practice, said that he and his colleagues are bedeviled by low-quality medicine in all sectors. Almost all of the generic drugs he prescribes—olanzapine, risperidone, diazepam—are substandard. The situation has forced him to increase dosages. To treat psychosis, his colleagues from Europe typically prescribe 2.5 milligrams of haloperidol, the generic version of Haldol, several times a day. They are shocked to learn that he’ll prescribe 10 milligrams, three times a day, because he knows that the 2.5 milligram dose「won’t do anything.」Those initially shocked colleagues become converts once they realize they have to increase doses to get an effect. Donnir once gave ten times the typical dose of diazepam, an anti-anxiety drug, to a fifteen-year old boy, an amount that should have knocked him out. The patient was「still smiling,」said Donnir.

Though data is scarce, in 2012 the Ghana Food and Drugs Authority, with help from the USP and USAID, tested the quality of maternal health drugs on the market. They zeroed in on oxytocin and ergometrine, both essential medicines used to prevent postpartum hemorrhaging. The results were devastating. The report, published in 2013, found that over half of all the oxytocin samples, and almost three-quarters of the ergometrine injection samples, made by various generic companies, failed. All of the ergometrine tablets failed—that is, they produced no effect at all. Some samples contained no active ingredient, and others failed sterility tests, results that pointed to only one conclusion: substandard manufacturing. The drugs, almost all of which came from India and China, were a death sentence for women bleeding due to childbirth.

Most of the time, Ghana’s patients have no idea what kind of medicine they take or who manufactures it. The culture in Ghana is faith-based, explained Bright Simons, a technology innovator:「People actually pray [their] medicine will work.」

In 2008, Alexandra Graham, an African scientist, opened LaGray Chemical Co., a drug manufacturing company outside Ghana’s capital, Accra, with the goal of making high-quality drugs that would follow international standards for good manufacturing practices. Graham, who is Nigerian, and her Ghanaian husband, Paul Lartey, had ideal backgrounds for the effort. They met while working at Abbott Laboratories in Chicago, she as a chemist and manager of the Specialty Products Division, and he, also a chemist, as director of the company’s infectious disease drug discovery unit. Initially, they looked to India’s generic drug industry as a model for manufacturing high-quality drugs in a low-cost environment. It was the model that Dr. Yusuf Hamied at Cipla had set for the world.

Graham traveled to India to learn how the country had accomplished such a feat. Instead of being inspired, she was shocked by what she saw. Graham toured a manufacturing facility so decrepit that it was essentially a house with「little bedrooms that were the manufacturing sites.」The site lacked the quality controls needed to prevent cross-contamination.「There was no air conditioning, no [ventilation] system, dust everywhere,」she recalled. As she left, she noticed the security guard packaging the drugs, which were destined for Nigeria and Kenya. They were not even approved for sale in India.

Graham resolved to run her business differently, but doing so was a formidable challenge. With unreliable electricity, it was difficult to keep the lights on, much less run complex chemical reactions with sensitive equipment. But the bigger challenge came from competition abroad. With Indian and Chinese drug representatives「aggressively coming into the country,」selling cheap medicine, and「offering all sorts of incentives and bribes,」Graham said, her company struggled to compete. Corrupt local wholesalers even negotiated with the drug companies to sell drugs with reduced amounts of active ingredient, making them cheaper.

Seeking help, Graham turned to a respected colleague, the CEO and chairman of a major Indian drug maker. His advice perturbed her. He suggested that she set up one「good factory」capable of producing a「showpiece product」and a second factory that met「local standards.」It became clear to Graham that the idea of high quality at low cost was a myth. Companies that flaunted their factories as「US-FDA inspected」or「WHO-certified」happily sold a cheaper, second-tier product to Africans. Graham found herself caught in a vise. Even if she insisted on making drugs of one high standard only, she couldn’t guarantee that the companies supplying her with active ingredients were doing the same.

In 2014, to buy the active ingredients for HIV drugs, Graham turned to the Chinese firm Shanghai Desano, whose factory in Binhai had been inspected and approved by the WHO. Early in negotiations, a Desano sales rep offered LaGray a discounted product reserved for「African customers.」The ingredients were cheaper, the sales rep explained, because they were not produced at the WHO-approved Binhai plant, but at a clandestine plant in Puxin, China. Graham was furious. She dashed out an email to the company’s vice president, exclaiming,「Whatever is good for any other market is appropriate for Ghana!」

Graham’s standards were expensive, and her refusal to prioritize profit over quality did not sit well with her investors, who began to sell their shares. By 2016, her company had closed and the manufacturing plant outside Accra was「overgrown with grasses,」she said. Without strong regulatory reform in Africa, India, and China, she cannot imagine a way to rein in substandard drug production.「The landscape is such that there are no incentives for quality,」she said.「When you’re playing by the rules, you just cannot survive.」

Public health experts first began to expose the problem of dual-track manufacturing years earlier. In 2003, an international aid worker and pharmacist, Jean-Michel Caudron, decided to visit the international generic drug companies to observe the production process. Gaining access to the manufacturing sites was「quite simple,」said Caudron.「At the time, I was working with Doctors Without Borders and UNICEF, and we were purchasing a lot of medicines . . . so I was welcome [to] visit.」Caudron was treated like a potential customer, and he and his colleagues were granted extraordinary access to manufacturing facilities in India and other parts of the world, where he witnessed multi-tiered production.「I heard the managers of a famous company in India explaining that they were very proud to be validated by the US FDA and Europe, [then] they said very clearly they were producing different quality for non-regulated countries,」Caudron recalled. When he asked a manager why the company would produce different standards for different markets, the manager replied,「Oh, those markets in Africa and Asia? They don’t ask for proof of safety.」

After cataloging dual-track production at 180 facilities over a four-year period, Caudron and his colleagues published a landmark paper in the European Journal of Tropical Medicine and International Health. It described the alarmingly common business tactic of undercutting quality for less-regulated markets, effectively creating「one standard for the rich, another for the poor.」

As international researchers grapple with the problem of dual-track production, an increasing number are linking the phenomenon to another global catastrophe: drug resistance, in which bacterial and other infections evolve to resist the very medicine designed to treat them. It is exactly the sort of ticking time bomb that Peter Baker feared. In 2014, the British government commissioned an ambitious effort to map the harm of drug resistance and propose possible solutions. The first of a series of reports estimated that if current trends continue, 10 million people will die every year from drug-resistant infections by 2050.「If we fail to act,」said the former British prime minister David Cameron,「we are looking at an almost unthinkable scenario where antibiotics no longer work and we are cast back into the dark ages of medicine.」

Ultimately, the project culminated in nine major reports, most of which blamed three factors typically associated with drug resistance: pollution from drug manufacturing in developing countries, which spews medicine into lakes and rivers; the widespread overuse of antibiotics in livestock; and medication misuse, when patients don’t take their medicine exactly as prescribed. But one of those reports blamed a fourth factor: substandard generics that are systematically underdosing wide populations in the developing world. Researchers working in developing countries, where poor-quality generic drugs and drug resistance are both prevalent, have increasingly examined a link between the two.

Low-income countries are plagued by poor-quality medicine: counterfeit pills made by criminal gangs and substandard generics made by second-rate drug companies. Though counterfeit drugs look like genuine products, they often contain no active ingredients. By contrast, substandard drugs typically contain active ingredients, but they do not contain enough, or are not formulated well enough, to be effective. Though counterfeit medicine attracts the lion’s share of political outrage and media attention, some experts now argue that substandard drugs are actually a greater threat to public health. Often, substandard drugs do not contain enough active ingredient to effectively treat sick patients. But they do contain enough to kill off the weakest microbes while leaving the strongest intact. These surviving microbes go on to reproduce, creating a new generation of pathogens capable of resisting even fully potent, properly made medicine.

In 2011, during an outbreak of drug-resistant malaria on the Thailand-Cambodia border, American public health expert Christopher Raymond fingered substandard drugs as a culprit. Treating patients with drugs that contain a little bit of active ingredient is like「putting out fire with gasoline,」said Raymond, former chief of party for the USP in Indonesia. From his vantage point in Southeast Asia, Raymond could see a clear correlation between regions with high volumes of substandard drugs and「hotspots」of drug resistance.

Paul Newton, a British malaria expert who works in Southeast Asia, has observed the overlapping problems of substandard antimalarial drugs and emerging resistance for nearly two decades. In 2016, he coauthored an editorial that explained that drugs containing「sub-lethal」concentrations of antimalarial medicine create a「survival advantage」for the parasites that can withstand a subpotent dose. Still, he cautioned that the connection, although logical and highly likely, was not yet backed by robust scientific evidence.

By 2017, with circumstantial evidence piling up, the nonprofit group USP launched a new center called the Quality Institute, which funds research into the link between drug quality and resistance. In late 2018, that funding bore fruit. Dr. Muhammad Zaman at Boston University coauthored the first study to link substandard drugs to antimicrobial resistance. Working in a laboratory, Zaman studied a commonly used antibiotic called rifampicin. If it’s not manufactured properly, it can yield an impurity as it degrades called rifampicin quinone. When Zaman subjected bacteria to the impurity, it developed mutations that helped it resist rifampicin and other similar drugs. Zaman hopes his laboratory work will help convince policymakers that substandard drugs are an「independent pillar」in the global menace of drug resistance, potentially on par with poor adherence and prescription misuse.

Elizabeth Pisani, an epidemiologist who has studied drug quality in Indonesia, wrote in a 2015 report,「Antimicrobial Resistance: What Does Medicine Quality Have to Do with It,」that subpotent drugs are fueling a crisis of drug resistance in lower-income countries that rich countries soon won’t be able to ignore:「The fact is, pathogens know no borders.」

When a pathogen evolves to resist every known treatment, every patient in the world becomes a potential victim. In August 2016, a Nevada woman in her seventies returned home from an extended trip to India, where she had broken her femur. An infection that had started in her thigh bone soon spread to her hip. She checked into a Reno hospital, where doctors immediately tested her for multi-drug-resistant bacteria. The CDC confirmed that she had carbapenem-resistant Enterobacteriaceae (CRE), a「nightmare bacteria」with no known cure, as Thomas Frieden, the CDC’s former director, described it at a news conference.

In Nevada, there wasn’t much doctors could do to save the woman. Their bigger concern was saving other patients from the same fate. The hospital immediately set up an isolation room so that the infection wouldn’t spread, and the staff donned masks, gloves, and gowns while caring for the woman. In less than a month, she was dead.

What started in Mahatma Gandhi’s ashram as a campaign of Indian self-reliance had morphed into a pharmaceutical rescue mission for the world’s most unfortunate patients. Dr. Hamied’s revolution, as it thundered along, offered generic drug companies the chance to act as global equalizers and make the same cures available to the wealthy and impoverished alike. But what Thakur had first documented on a spreadsheet at Ranbaxy, and what Baker observed in manufacturing plants throughout India, was not the fulfillment of that ideal. It was the ultimate subversion and exploitation of it—making the worst medicine for the poorest patients, with life-and-death consequences for us all.

In Ghana, the technology innovator Bright Simons summed up the stark reality:「All medicines are poisonous. It’s only under the most controlled conditions that they do good.」Only a drug accompanied by data that traces a minute-by-minute path through the manufacturing process can be trusted to work properly. How could anyone guarantee that standard in an underpoliced global marketplace? Only one-tenth of African countries had effective regulators, and two-fifths lacked laboratories capable of routinely testing medicine quality.

Those deficits brought Dr. Patrick H. Lukulay to Ghana’s capital, where he set out to train a generation of African Peter Bakers. In Accra, he ran the Center for Pharmaceutical Advancement and Training (CePAT), an outpost of the USP that opened in 2013. Located down an unpaved dirt lane and set behind a long metal gate, the facility appears unremarkable from the outside. Inside, however, it’s a marvel: door locks are controlled by biometric fingerprint readers, a state-of-the-art microbiology lab is full of costly HPLC machines, and a stability room has specialized refrigerators that test how quickly drugs degrade.

The center runs the continent’s only dedicated program for training African drug regulators and also operates a fully accredited laboratory to test drug quality. With these resources, Lukulay hoped to lift the quality of medicine across Africa. It did little good for one country to up its game, said Lukulay, when「its neighbors are all screwed up.」

A highly trained scientist with a commanding though kindly air, Lukulay was uniquely suited for his mission in Ghana. He grew up in an impoverished village in Sierra Leone, where his father, the village chief, had twenty-five children. Lukulay studied by kerosene lantern and slept on a bed of palm leaves. Through stellar academic performance and sheer grit, he propelled himself to a school in Sierra Leone’s capital, Freetown, and ultimately to graduate studies at Michigan State University. He went on to work at Pfizer and Wyeth in the United States before moving to the USP. His childhood experiences left him with an indelible sense of the obstacles in Africa.

In March 2016, several dozen young regulators who worked for various African governments, including Mozambique, Swaziland, Rwanda, Zambia and Liberia, arrived at CePAT for a training workshop. They spent two weeks learning how to more rigorously vet the dossiers submitted by drug companies and think critically about their claims, as one of their trainers put it, instead of running through a perfunctory checklist. The training program’s graduation ceremony was solemn, to emphasize to the regulators their critical role as the first line of defense against poor-quality medicine. Lukulay’s colleague urged them to「go forth like living water」into Africa, the「ultimate testing laboratory.」

Lukulay then stepped forward, wearing a ceremonial outfit of a long tunic, flowing pants, and embroidered cap.「You are soldiers of the state,」he told the graduates.「You have been given ammunition, you have been equipped to do battle with those who want to kill our people.」Expecting them to encounter corruption or political interference at some point, he emphasized that their jobs were「noble」and「ethical.」But most importantly, he emphasized, when they had a dossier before them, they had to ask:「Am I going to check the boxes, or am I going to be a real assessor?」

