# Part II India Rises

## 0201. Freedom Fighters

1920

Ahmedabad, Gujarat, India

For many years, few people wanted to take Indian medicine, let alone praise the companies making it. To the brand-name pharmaceutical companies that had spent decades and millions developing drugs, the Indian companies that copied their products were no better than thieves. They deserved to be sued rather than thanked. And to patients around the world, the MADE IN INDIA label connoted flea-market quality they’d prefer to avoid.

Behind the scenes, however, one man did more than anyone to change this perception and lay the path that led to Bill Clinton’s visit: Dr. Yusuf K. Hamied. For years, as the chairman of the Indian drug giant Cipla Ltd., he had made drugs that even his own government wouldn’t buy and made bold public offers that most people ignored. He didn’t care what anyone thought of him. He relished the ire of the brand-name companies he battled. And then one day in 2001, he made an announcement that attached a whole new set of words to Indian drug makers: iconoclasts, visionaries, saviors.

But Dr. Hamied’s story—and the launch of India’s modern-day pharmaceutical industry—really began a century ago, in an ashram. Not just any ashram, but the Sabarmati Ashram founded by Mahatma Gandhi in what today is Ahmedabad, in the western state of Gujarat. From there, India’s most revered activist set about trying to liberate India from British rule, through what became known as the noncooperation movement.

Around 1920, Gandhi began urging all Indians to turn their backs on anything British. Civil servants abandoned government posts, Indian students left British-run universities, and civilians stayed home during the Prince of Wales’s visit in November 1921.

A charismatic young chemistry student, Khwaja Abdul Hamied, heeded Gandhi’s call. Handsome with a regal carriage, K. A. Hamied was a natural leader among his peers. He left school and went to Sabarmati, where Gandhi directed him and another student, Zakir Husain, to leave the ashram and start an Indian-run university. They did so. To the students, Gandhi was a「great prophet for the freedom of the country,」as Hamied later recalled.「His words were law unto us.」Husain would later become India’s third president. The school he helped to found, Jamia Millia Islamia in New Delhi, remains in operation today, with a mission statement to prepare Indian students to be masters of their own future.

In 1924, after Gandhi—fiercely committed to nonviolence—suspended his movement because of an outbreak of violence among his followers, Hamied left to study abroad. He received his doctorate in chemistry in Berlin. On a school outing to a lake, he met and fell in love with a Lithuanian Jewish girl with Communist leanings. They married in 1928 in Berlin’s only mosque. With Hitler rising to power, they headed to India, and later sponsored a dozen Jewish families to come there, saving them from almost certain death.

Back home in 1930, Hamied found a depleted and impoverished research environment, lacking even functional laboratories. The pharmaceutical market was almost entirely dominated by multinational companies, from Boots and Burroughs Wellcome to Parke Davis. With few exceptions, the Indians acted as mere distributors.

A young man with little money, Hamied dreamed of launching a grand laboratory and was finally able to found Cipla in 1935. Four years later, at the start of World War II, Gandhi visited Hamied’s manufacturing plant and wrote in the guest book,「I was delighted to visit this Indian enterprise.」But Gandhi’s visit was not just a social call. It had a vital purpose. Britain had promised India its independence, so long as Indians helped in the war effort. Part of that effort was to make medicine. While demand for medicine from the Indian army had surged, supplies from Europe’s drug makers had collapsed. Quietly, Gandhi urged Hamied to step into this void, which he did. Cipla became the largest producer of the antimalarial drug quinine and vitamin B12 for soldiers suffering from anemia.

Although Hamied lived modestly, the vagaries of Indian rent laws enabled him to lease a palatial apartment, the 7,000-square-foot ground floor of the Jassim House, in Bombay’s elegant seaside neighborhood, Cuffe Parade. There, as India’s famous freedom fighters visited the Hamied household, the children learned about the need for both political and personal independence.「If you are going to prosper in life, you have to do it yourself」was the lesson Hamied’s young son, Yusuf, gleaned from his father.

India gained independence in 1947 (Gandhi was tragically assassinated just one year later). By then, Hamied had been elected to the Bombay Legislative Council. In 1953, he was appointed sheriff of Bombay, a ceremonial role akin to the city’s leading ambassador. As politics consumed more of his time, his son Yusuf stepped up to run Cipla.

Known as Yuku to family and friends, Yusuf had his father’s keen scientific mind, striking features, intense narrow eyes, and wry smile. At eighteen, he left to study chemistry at Cambridge and earned his PhD by the time he was twenty-three.

He returned in 1960 to work at Cipla, only to run into a thicket of red tape. Indian rules stated that, because the company was publicly traded, the government had to approve the hire of anyone related to a company director and set that person’s salary. Consequently, for a year, Yuku earned nothing, and then for the next three years he made the equivalent of $20 a month, until he could reapply to the government for a raise.

Like his father, Yuku became a voracious reader of scientific literature. He essentially taught himself how to manufacture tablets and injectable drugs. He also revolutionized the making of active ingredients, a drug’s essential components. These are often manufactured separately and sold to other pharma companies, which then add ingredients known as excipients to make a finished drug. Under Yuku’s leadership, Cipla eventually became one of India’s biggest manufacturers of bulk drugs. At the time, India followed the outdated British patent laws of 1911, which made medications in India even more expensive than in Europe. Under these laws, most pharmaceuticals were blocked for development. But Yuku found possibility in one medical area, where most of the patents had expired in the 1940s.

Looking around Bombay, with its profound poverty and exploding population, Yuku set out to develop a line of birth control medication. He offered it to the government, India’s main purchaser and distributor of medicines, for two rupees (then around 20 cents) a month. Birth control in the United States cost around $8 a month. The government turned him down, seemingly indifferent to its population problem.

The birth control disappointment came at the same time as one of his biggest accomplishments. In 1961, he helped form the Indian Drug Manufacturers’ Association (IDMA), which set out to amend India’s antiquated patent laws. Prime Minister Indira Gandhi was highly sympathetic and would later say at the World Health Organization in 1981:「My idea of a better ordered world is one in which medical discoveries would be free of patents and there would be no profiteering from life or death.」

The 1970 Indian Patents Act made it legal to copy an existing molecule, but illegal to copy the process by which it was made. This gave India’s chemists freedom to remake existing drugs so long as they altered the steps to formulate them. The law created fierce antagonism between India’s generic drug makers and the multinational brand-name drug companies, many of which left the Indian market.

India’s golden age of pharma began as the new patent law took effect. Indians became accomplished reverse-engineers, and their companies began not only supplying the Indian market but exporting to Africa, Latin America, Iran, the Middle East, and Southeast Asia.

In 1972, Yuku’s larger-than-life father, Khwaja Abdul Hamied, died, and Yuku became Cipla’s CEO. Even as he amassed wealth—buying homes, polo ponies, and art—he did not relish India’s「boom」in the same way as his peers did. All he had to do was walk outside his art-and-light-filled corporate headquarters in Mumbai to find an unignorable ocean of suffering. Millions of its residents lived in desperate slums, with no reliable access to electricity, sanitation, or food. Thousands lived on the roadside, without even a tarp over their heads.

The future he saw was one with too many people, too many diseases, and not enough medicine. It was this perspective—the world he was unable to not see—that led in large part to what happened next. It would take the son of an Indian freedom fighter and a Jewish Communist, with a background imprinted by Gandhi, to radically reimagine the horizon for Indian drug makers.

By contrast, the drug company Ranbaxy grew out of a set of values diametrically opposed to Cipla’s. Unlike Hamied, Bhai Mohan Singh was not the product of Gandhian inspiration. He was a veteran of the so-called License Raj, India’s antiquated business regime in which the government set every quota and dispensed every permit and license. The system required high-level connections and wads of rupees, not just to get licenses but to block the licenses of competitors.

Few got better results than Bhai Mohan Singh, a distinguished financier with exquisite manners, who was born in Punjab in 1917 to a wealthy Sikh family. His father had been a construction magnate. Bhai Mohan initially refused to enter the family business, but as World War II raged, his father’s company got a massive contract to build barracks for the Indian army. Bhai Mohan’s father sent his son to the Kangra valley to oversee the arrival of building supplies. More contracts followed the successful project, including one for a major highway to take British troops to the border of what was then Burma.

Through infrastructure, the family became one of the wealthiest in Punjab, and Bhai Mohan secured his place in a rarefied world. By 1946, his father had retired and transferred most of his assets to Bhai Mohan, making him a magnate. With this windfall, he formed a finance company, Bhai Traders and Financiers Pvt. Ltd., and loaned money to numerous businesses. One was a small drug distribution company called Ranbaxy & Co. Ltd.

His cousins Ranjit and Gurbax, a clothier and a pharmaceutical distributor, had started the company in 1937 (and named it by combining their two first names), with the modest goal of distributing foreign drugs in India. In 1952, after Gurbax was unable to repay the initial loan, Bhai Mohan bought the company, kept Gurbax on as president (because he was knowledgeable about the pharmaceutical trade), and incorporated in 1961. Bhai Mohan had three sons, including Parvinder. In time he would refer to Ranbaxy as his fourth.

Among Bhai Mohan’s many assets, Ranbaxy was hardly a prize. At the time, the reputation of most Indian drug companies rested on the prestige of the foreign drugs they distributed. Ranbaxy primarily distributed Japanese drugs, then held in low esteem, so its reputation suffered. Chemists mocked the company salesmen for the cheap drugs they sold.

Bhai Mohan, who had no experience with pharmaceuticals, might have turned his back on the company entirely. But when Gurbax tried to oust him from the board, the duel for corporate control—which Bhai Mohan won—piqued his interest in the industry.

If Bhai Mohan knew little about pharmaceuticals, he knew everything about besting his rivals through boardroom maneuvers and the deployment of his connections, which included government ministers and powerful bank executives. When his alliance with an Italian drug company no longer suited him, for example, he had his allies surreptitiously report the company’s legal violations to the government. The company was asked to leave the country, enabling Bhai Mohan to take over the Italian company’s shares on his own terms.

However, his mastery of the License Raj did not help him make a cutting-edge pharmaceutical company. Ranbaxy had no particular mission or vision. Nor did it have any capacity to manufacture its own products. It had a single factory that reformulated bulk drugs into tablets and capsules from raw ingredients acquired elsewhere.

Two things propelled the company into the future. In 1968, Ranbaxy had its first pharmaceutical success when it launched a generic version of Roche’s Valium under the product name Calmpose and rolled it out with a phrase from the nineteenth-century poet Ghalib:「When the day of death is set, why does sleep elude me all night?」The drug became India’s first「superbrand.」More consequential, however, was the return of Bhai Mohan’s eldest son, Parvinder. In 1967, he came back from the United States with a doctorate in pharmacy from the University of Michigan at Ann Arbor and immediately joined the company, bringing with him skills and a seriousness of purpose that Ranbaxy had previously lacked.

Intense and more austere than his father, Parvinder had left India a middling student, more committed to refining his golf game than applying himself to his studies. But in Michigan, he had spent day and night in the laboratory. The dean there had written to Bhai Mohan that a student like Parvinder came along only once in a decade. He had also returned with a more profound sense of his own spirituality. He married the daughter of a guru who led a spiritual organization that prohibited alcohol and meat.

Unlike his father, Parvinder believed that Ranbaxy had to achieve independence. The company could have no control of its destiny, or the quality of its products, until it could make its own active ingredients and do its own research. Both required huge infusions of capital. To finance it, Parvinder helped take the company public in 1973.

Though Parvinder envisioned Ranbaxy as a global company, the rest of the world still held a dim view of Indian medicine. In Thailand, Ranbaxy’s business was so poor that the company held a prayer ceremony with sixteen local monks to try to turn things around. The U.S. market was the world’s largest and most lucrative, but also the most difficult to enter, with the most vigilant regulators. And though Indian companies were selling active ingredients to drug companies there, finished doses were a whole other matter.

In 1987, two Ranbaxy executives traveled to the United States to gauge the possibility of exporting there. As recounted in a company-sponsored book:

They met representatives from 20 companies and all of them were bewildered to learn that an Indian company wanted to export finished formulations to the U.S. [One executive] recalls visiting a top American distributor who made him wait for two hours and then, after breaking a pencil [which had the words]「Made in Israel」[on it], he said,「Israelis are already invading the market here, and now we will have pharmaceuticals and medicines coming from India! What is the world coming to?」

However, some in the United States saw the future more clearly—and Parvinder forged alliances with them. He visited a fine chemicals importer named Agnes Varis at her Manhattan office. Varis was a firebrand and iconoclast, ahead of her time. She was one of eight children of Greek immigrants. Her father sold ice cream from a pushcart until his death, when Agnes was fourteen. Her mother, who was illiterate, sewed buttons in a garment factory. Varis got a degree in chemistry at Brooklyn College and in 1970, at age forty, launched her company, AgVar Chemicals, which brokered pharmaceutical ingredients from foreign manufacturers. Her company made millions, she became a major donor to the Democratic Party, and she was on a first-name basis with the Clintons.

Varis was immediately taken with Parvinder and his colleagues.「They were brilliant,」she recalled in 2010, the year before her death.「They were gorgeous. They dressed beautifully. Their English was perfect. I felt they were on a very high standard.」With her pharmaceutical know-how and golden Rolodex, she would become their political benefactor in their quest to sell finished doses in the United States.

Back in India, as the company drove to expand, Bhai Mohan was looking to ensure family peace. In 1989, at age seventy-one, he split the growing family businesses among his three sons, a settlement intended to ensure an amicable division before he died. He gave his eldest, Parvinder, all of his Ranbaxy shares. Manjit, the middle son, got an agrochemical company and some luxury properties. Analjit, the youngest, inherited Max India, a fine chemicals company whose biggest customer was Ranbaxy. Because Ranbaxy was the largest of the three companies, the two younger brothers inherited additional funds.

As the businesses inherited by the younger sons foundered, Manjit and Analjit grew bitter and believed that they had been shortchanged. They came to resent Parvinder, whom they viewed as the favored son. The brothers’ relationship soured to the point where Analjit believed that Ranbaxy was orchestrating secret smear campaigns against him and his company. He told his close aides that he found Parvinder cold, calculating, and emotionless.「My brother loved to push a chili up my back every day,」he recalled of his childhood.

For his part, Parvinder thrived as Ranbaxy’s managing director. In 1991, India liberalized its economy, scrapping its system of quotas and licenses and opening whole sectors of the economy to foreign investment. Parvinder intensified his focus on expanding overseas. Within the company, his reputation was towering:「He was larger than life,」one former associate remarked.「The people worshiped him. When he walked by, [employees] would bow.」

However, he and his father were soon locked in conflict. Not long after gifting Parvinder his stake in Ranbaxy, Bhai Mohan began waging a battle against him. He accused Parvinder of violating the family settlement agreement by blocking his veto power over company matters. Their conflict was not just over the internal exercise of power, but rather over two different visions—one old and one new—of India. With the economy now open to outside capital, India’s companies needed competent professionals with real skills, not just「liaison managers between the government and industrialists.」Bhai Mohan’s connections had become less important. Feeling sidelined, he openly fought with his son at board meetings.

Their biggest clash centered on a manager, Davinder Singh Brar, whom Parvinder brought into the company in 1978. Brar was a master tactician with an MBA who had become Parvinder’s indispensable deputy. As father and son battled over whether to keep Brar on, Ranbaxy’s board split their allegiances. Dozens of warring executives, some for Bhai Mohan, some for Brar, marched to the boardroom shouting competing slogans. An executive who led the pro-Brar delegation was fired by Bhai Mohan one morning but reinstated by Parvinder the same afternoon. On February 6, 1993, Manjit warned his father of plans to oust him at a board meeting that day. Bhai Mohan and his supporters resigned. Parvinder took over as Ranbaxy’s chairman and managing director, and Bhai assumed the title of chairman emeritus. Parvinder and his father never made amends. Instead, Bhai Mohan filed a lawsuit against his son for violating the terms of the inheritance settlement, a dispute that would drag on into the next generation.

By 1995, Ranbaxy was the first company in Indian pharma to get a plant approved by the FDA to make products for the U.S. market. By then, four-fifths of Ranbaxy’s sales came from abroad. Two years later, Parvinder was diagnosed with cancer of the esophagus. His father was so bitter that he wrote his son to say that he wouldn’t attend his funeral. (In fact, he ended up organizing it and making use of all his connections to ensure that four hundred people attended the cremation.) With Parvinder’s death in July 1999, his ownership of Ranbaxy passed to his two sons, Malvinder, age twenty-six, and Shivinder, twenty-four.

Bhai Mohan tried to draft his grandsons onto the Ranbaxy board immediately, as a way to reassert control over the company. But the spirit of Parvinder still seemed to be blocking this possibility. In his final press interview a month before his death, Parvinder insisted that his sons should only join the board once they’d gained enough professional experience to merit it. Honoring their deceased father, the brothers issued a statement saying that they would follow his wishes.

Shivinder went to work in a separate family-owned hospital business. Malvinder worked at Ranbaxy in a low-level position, making sales calls to doctors and pharmacists in small towns and villages. With his Western business education (he had attended Duke University’s Fuqua School of Business) and Indian spiritual values, Malvinder rose quickly at Ranbaxy. Meanwhile, the company was being run by the professional manager Brar, whose original tenure had precipitated the ugly fight between father and son.

Parvinder had set up Ranbaxy for a globalized world. But for all his foresight and preparation, he never could have planned what would ultimately bring the world to Ranbaxy’s doorstep. An immense crisis was looming, one that would eclipse the skills of even the most professional manager. It would require moral imagination on a vast scale—and summon Cipla’s CEO Yusuf Hamied to action.

Chapter 7

One Dollar a Day

1986

Mumbai, India

Dr. Yusuf Hamied of Cipla was a prolific reader of medical journals, with an annual subscription budget that topped $150,000. One day in 1986, he was introduced to something he knew nothing about. A colleague mentioned,「According to the Tufts report, AZT is the only drug available for AIDS.」

「What is AIDS?」Dr. Hamied responded.

Just five years earlier, in 1981, the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) had reported the emergence of a rare cancer, Kaposi’s sarcoma, among clusters of young gay men in San Francisco and New York. The following year, doctors and the media gave the puzzling ailment the misleading shorthand name GRID (gay-related immune deficiency). In Africa, doctors confronting a mysterious wasting syndrome called the disease「Slim.」By the summer of 1982, the CDC had connected these dots, identifying acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS) and its precursor, the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV).

At the time of Dr. Hamied’s question, the disease had barely surfaced in most of India. But it was brewing so forcefully in Bombay’s red-light district, not far from Cipla’s headquarters, that within a few years Hamied’s own city would earn the moniker「AIDS Capital of India.」

Within a decade, AIDS was destroying Africa. More than five thousand people a day were dying. In certain African countries, one-quarter of the population was infected. In some local communities, the biggest industry was making wooden coffins. Africa was becoming a continent of orphans, the number of children without parents doubling every year. The disease was projected to kill up to 90 million Africans by 2025.

In 1991, Dr. Rama Rao, the research head of an Indian government laboratory, told Hamied that he had developed a chemical synthesis of AZT, or azidothymidine, and wanted Cipla to manufacture it. It was the only drug that postponed the onset of AIDS. But just one company, Burroughs Wellcome in the United States, made it, and it was selling the drug at roughly $8,000 per patient a year. Hamied readily agreed to manufacture it and launched the drug in 1993 at less than one-tenth of the international price, or about $2 a day. Even that price was still well beyond what most Indians could afford.「Our sales were zero,」Hamied recalled.

At that point, Hamied asked the government if it could purchase and distribute the drug. But the Indian government refused: it had money only for detection and prevention, not treatment. In total disgust, Hamied ended up discarding 200,000 capsules. With the stigma surrounding AIDS, he had no one to sell them to—or even give them to.

A few years later, Hamied read in a medical journal that a cocktail of three drugs called HAART (highly active anti-retroviral therapy) was effective in controlling AIDS. The three drugs in question—stavudine, lamivudine, and nevirapine—were made by three different multinational drug companies. The combined price for a single patient reached $12,000 a year. Not only was the treatment regimen onerous, but few could afford it. Hamied immediately set out to make the drugs in the cocktail.

In 1997, under the leadership of Nelson Mandela, South Africa altered its law to make it easier to sidestep pharmaceutical patents and import low-cost medicine. No country needed the AIDS cocktail more badly than South Africa, which had emerged as an epicenter of the epidemic. But South Africa, along with over 130 nations, was bound by an international trade agreement called TRIPS (Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights), which required that all members of the World Trade Organization (WTO) ensure basic protection for intellectual property.

South Africa’s new law sparked a furious reaction from Big Pharma. Fearing a domino effect, thirty-nine international brand-name drug companies, with the support of the U.S. government, sued South Africa, claiming that the new health law violated the TRIPS agreement. The Pharmaceutical Manufacturers Association of South Africa, representing Big Pharma, rolled out newspaper ads with an image of a crying baby, warning that the law would allow「counterfeit, fake, expired and harmful medicines」into the market. Brand-name drug companies closed factories and withdrew from the country, with the claim that South Africa was intent on destroying international treaties.

It was a deadly global stalemate. As drug companies skirmished over intellectual property, 24 million people got sicker, with no foreseeable access to the affordable medicine they so desperately needed. On August 8, 2000, Hamied got a call from an activist in the United States whom he had never met.「Me and some of my colleagues would like to come see you,」said the man on the phone. It was William F. Haddad, the expletive-spouting former investigative journalist who had campaigned so vigorously for the Hatch-Waxman Act, the law that launched the U.S. generic drug industry.

He had gotten Hamied’s name from Agnes Varis, who told him,「He’s a brilliant chemist. And he’s not frightened by the multinationals.」The colleagues Haddad referred to were a motley group of activists who had banded together in pursuit of a single objective—to find a way to get affordable AIDS medicine to those who needed it most, free from the stranglehold of patents. Jamie Packard Love, an intellectual-property activist, had helped advise the South African government on amending and defending its new patent law. In the United States, he had set out to learn the real cost of manufacturing the drugs, and nobody seemed to know.「If it was 40 million white people that were going to die, somebody would know the answer to that question,」Love recalled.

Four days after contacting Hamied, Bill Haddad, Jamie Love, and three others, including a French doctor with the group Doctors Without Borders, arrived at the elegant London duplex where Hamied sat out the brutal Indian summer. He led them up the stairs to a glass dining table. Surrounded by costly art, including a work from one of India’s most famous artists, M. F. Husain, and overlooking the exclusive Gloucester Square garden, they asked him: how low could he price the AIDS cocktail, and how much of it could he make?

As they spoke, Hamied scrawled calculations with a pencil and paper. He concluded that he could cut his price by more than half, to about $800 a year. The men talked into the night, and the group vowed that they would support Hamied in the inevitable battles with the multinational drug companies that lay ahead. Together, an Indian drug maker and international activists had forged an extraordinary alliance, pledging to upend the established global commercial and pharmaceutical order in order to save millions of lives.

About a month later, in part through their efforts, Hamied received an invitation to speak at the European Commission’s conference in Brussels on HIV/AIDS, malaria, tuberculosis, and poverty reduction. He readily accepted and was given three minutes for his address. On September 28, 2000, he took to the podium and looked out over the gathering of staid, skeptical—and white—Europeans, who included health ministers, ex–prime ministers, and representatives of multinational drug companies.「Friends,」he told the unfriendly group,「I represent the third world. I represent the needs and aspirations of the third world. I represent the capabilities of the third world, and above all, I represent an opportunity.」

He then proceeded to unveil three offers: he would sell the AIDS cocktail for $800 a year ($600 to governments buying in bulk); give the technology to make the drugs free to any African government willing to produce its own drugs; and provide nevirapine, the drug that limited transmission of the disease from mother to child, for free. He was literally slashing his own prices before their eyes. He closed with a challenge:「We call upon the participants of this conference to do what their conscience dictates.」

Hamied had been expecting a pharmaceutical revolution as governments embraced his offer. The world did not often hear the word「discount,」let alone「free,」attached to expensive medicine. But he finished to a stone-silent room. No one took him up on his proposal. Partly, this was because Hamied was offering discounted medicine in the middle of a minefield. The global pharmaceutical marketplace was intersected by patents and trade agreements, which precluded many countries from reaching out for cheap medicine. But the other problem was credibility. Much of the world viewed Indian generics as poor-quality knockoffs, a perception that Hamied had labored against for years.

In 2000, that perception led New York Times reporter Donald G. McNeil Jr. to India to try to reconcile these conflicting views. He’d heard from officials at Doctors Without Borders that some Indian manufacturers were producing high-quality drugs at a fraction of the cost. Which was true? Fly-by-night counterfeiter or quality discounter? Hamied offered McNeil full access to his operations and laboratories. The resulting article, a detailed profile of the Cambridge-educated chemist, ran on the front page of the New York Times and introduced Western readers to a new concept: counter to the claims of brand-name companies, costly drugs could actually be made reliably for pennies.

On January 26, 2001, one of the most devastating earthquakes ever recorded rocked the western state of Gujarat. It killed 20,000 people and injured 160,000 more. The world scrambled to respond. Bill Clinton, who’d just left office, raised money and traveled to India to offer aid. Dr. Hamied opened his warehouses and donated vast amounts of medicine. But for him, the event was a different sort of wake-up call. As the world scrambled to save the victims trapped under buildings or left homeless, Hamied realized that AIDS dwarfed the Gujarat earthquake by orders of magnitude. He decided then that he could not simply wait for governments to take him up on the offer he’d made in Brussels.

Just as he was pondering his next steps, the way forward presented itself. A few days after the earthquake, William Haddad called Hamied back, this time with a specific question. Would Cipla be able to offer the AIDS cocktail for $1 a day? After some back-of-the-envelope calculations, Hamied agreed. He would offer the price exclusively to Doctors Without Borders. It was a number low enough to be world-changing.

On February 6, 2001, at around midnight, Hamied was at a dinner party in Mumbai when his cell phone rang. The caller was the New York Times reporter Donald McNeil.「Dr. Hamied, is it true you offered $1 a day [to Doctors Without Borders]?」McNeil asked him. Once Hamied confirmed this, McNeil laughed aloud:「Dr. Hamied, your life will not be the same from tomorrow.」

McNeil’s story was published the next morning on the front page of the Times. According to the article, Cipla was offering to sell the AIDS cocktail for $350 a year per patient, or roughly $1 a day, as compared to Western prices of between $10,000 and $15,000 a year, but was being blocked by the multinational drug makers that held the patents, who were being backed by the Bush administration. McNeil’s story「completely broke the dikes,」Jamie Love recalled.

Papers all over the world picked it up. News of Big Pharma’s patent protection efforts in the face of the global pandemic and the Bush administration’s support of them sparked international outrage and stoked street protests from Philadelphia to Pretoria, even accusations of genocide. The result was a PR debacle for Big Pharma. Even among the industry’s lowest moments—the illegal marketing of drugs for off-label uses; the payoffs to doctors who acted as promotional mouthpieces; the concealment of negative safety data for high-profile drugs—its stance in South Africa seemed uniquely horrible. As the Wall Street Journal summed it up:「Can the pharmaceuticals industry inflict any more damage upon its ailing public image? Well, how about suing Nelson Mandela?」

It was an outrage that William Haddad would never forget.「Big Pharma, those cock-sucking bastards,」he yelled to a journalist years later.「Thirty-four million people had AIDS and every single one of them would die without the medicine. Would die and were dying. And they charged $15,000 dollars a year, and only four thousand people [in Africa] could afford the medicine.」

The disgust was mutual. As GlaxoSmithKline’s CEO Jean-Pierre Garnier declared of Cipla and the Indian generics companies at a 2001 health care forum,「They are pirates. That’s about what they are. They have never done a day of research in their lives.」Some in Big Pharma accused Hamied of trying to grab market share in Africa, to which he responded:「I am accused of having an ulterior motive. Of course I have an ulterior motive: before I die, I want to do some good.」

On March 5, 2001, as Big Pharma’s legal case against the South African government began in Pretoria, people rallied against the drug companies all over the world. In South Africa, demonstrators marched outside the high court in Pretoria. In Britain, they picketed GlaxoSmithKline plants. In the United States, AIDS activists held rallies in major cities.

Hamied and the activists prevailed. The following month, the multinational drug companies announced that they would drop their lawsuit and waive their patents so that generic fixed-dose combinations of the AIDS cocktail could be sold cheaply in Africa. In August, Cipla announced that its scientists had succeeded in creating Triomune, a single pill containing the unwieldy AIDS cocktail. To do so, Cipla had skirted Western patent laws, since the three drugs were made by different manufacturers, under separate patents, and could not legally be copied for years.

The Clinton Foundation stepped in and hammered out a deal in which Indian drug makers agreed to slash their prices even further, to 38 cents a day, in exchange for guaranteed large-volume purchases from African governments. The foundation even brought in process chemists to help the companies find ways to reduce the number of steps required to manufacture the drugs, which also brought down costs.

However, it was the $1 a day figure that changed the calculus of the West—from「we can’t afford to help」to「we can’t afford not to.」The AIDS activists had not counted on President George W. Bush as an ally. But on January 28, 2003, he stunned them by announcing in his State of the Union address a new program that would spend $15 billion on AIDS drugs over five years. He explained that the dramatic drop in costs「places a tremendous possibility within our grasp. . . . Seldom has history offered a greater opportunity to do so much for so many.」The program, which still operates today, was named PEPFAR (President’s Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief). Finally, the world, in its halting way, had caught up to the revolution that Hamied had launched.

For Big Pharma, PEPFAR was a nightmare scenario: a U.S.-taxpayer-funded effort to spend billions on generics bound for Africa. Just days after Bush unveiled the plan, some CEOs of multinational drug companies petitioned the White House to undo the commitment of the $1 a day cost. The answer was no. As a concession, however, Bush allowed the group to choose the head of PEPFAR. To the dismay of AIDS activists, they installed Randall Tobias, the former CEO of the drug company Eli Lilly.

Beyond the problem of cost, another question still loomed: quality. How could the West guarantee the quality of all the AIDS drugs it was buying for Africa? The generics advocates turned to the World Health Organization, which agreed to serve as an international clearinghouse for quality generics. It would inspect companies that wanted to sell AIDS drugs internationally and, if approved, would add those names to a prequalified list. But this solution didn’t satisfy everyone. Suddenly, under Tobias’s leadership, PEPFAR introduced a new requirement: any AIDS drugs being purchased for sale to Africa with U.S. taxpayer dollars had to be approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration.

The requirement triggered an avalanche of criticism. To AIDS activists, this was the ultimate bait-and-switch. Most of the Indian companies had never gotten FDA approval for any of their drugs. Activists suspected that this was a needless safeguard whose real purpose was to funnel money to Big Pharma and keep out generic manufacturers. They gained powerful adherents. In March 2004, six senators, including John McCain (R-AZ) and Ted Kennedy (D-MA), wrote a biting letter to President Bush, arguing that FDA approval would needlessly delay access to drugs and that the WHO’s standards「meet or exceed those used by respected regulatory agencies around the world.」In an obvious dig at Big Pharma, the senators wrote,「We question the purpose behind the Administration’s duplicative process being developed to review the safety and efficacy of generic drugs.」According to a former White House aide, even President Clinton called President Bush to explain that WHO approval had satisfied his foundation.

But the requirement for FDA review had not simply been a cynical advancement of Big Pharma’s interests. Inside the Bush administration, not everyone felt so sanguine about the quality of Indian generics. In a series of tense meetings at the White House and at the FDA, officials wrestled with the question of how to verify the quality of the drugs they would procure. They were bitterly divided.「We thought it would be a terrible ugly thing for U.S. taxpayers to buy subpotent, contaminated drugs for AIDS [in Africa],」recalled Dr. Scott Gottlieb, who was then director of medical policy development at the FDA and today is its commissioner.「There was a lot of pressure to buy Indian counterfeit drugs,」he recalled to a journalist, years prior to becoming commissioner, adding,「I call them counterfeits, everyone else calls them generics.」

Finally, in the face of intense bipartisan pressure, a compromise emerged. The FDA created an accelerated review process for PEPFAR drugs, resulting in a perceived win for public health. Affordable generic drugs available in Africa would have the benefit of FDA review. On May 27, 2005, Ranbaxy became the first Indian generics company to get approval from the PEPFAR program for one of its AIDS drugs. Many other companies followed.

Some of the world’s poorest people owe their lives to Dr. Hamied. However, his revolution came with an unintended consequence. As more Indian companies got approval from the FDA to sell their drugs in Africa, this led to a realization that would in short order upend the generic drug industry and transform the American drug supply: if Indians could make affordable medicine good enough to be approved by American regulators, then the drugs were good enough for Americans to take too.

Chapter 8

A Clever Way of Doing Things

DECEMBER 2005

Canonsburg, Pennsylvania

A brand-name drug, no matter how complex or difficult to make, inevitably follows a recipe, such as: mix fifteen minutes, granulate, mist until ingredients reach 4 percent moisture content, mix again for thirty minutes. Making a generic version, however, requires figuring out a different recipe, ideally one that is faster to make but produces a similar result. That effort of reverse-engineering is undertaken by process chemists.

Among them, Rajiv Malik ranked as one of the best. Trained in the laboratories of Punjab, he held more than sixty process patents for reverse-engineering. Over seventeen years at Ranbaxy, he rose to the head of formulation development and regulatory affairs. He was also a veteran of laboratory disasters, such as when Ranbaxy’s anti-acne drug Sotret yielded failing results. His colleagues’「irrationality」in choosing to continue sales of the defective formulation contributed to his decision to leave, he would later say. He submitted his resignation in June 2003.

Taking an eight-step chemical synthesis, like A-B-C-D-E-F-G and altering it to G-C-B-F is no simple task. The formulation has to produce results that can withstand scrutiny from regulators and legal challenges from patent lawyers. Malik was in the business of finding solutions to problems that eluded others. Fast-talking, with a buoyant personality, he had a warm smile, graying salt-and-pepper hair, and a tendency to curse exuberantly.

Malik left Ranbaxy just as the U.S. government came to rely on Indian companies to make low-cost drugs for Africa. With that came a notable shift. Indian companies were also moving into the U.S. market, and U.S. companies were moving their operations to India, in a turbo-charged global marketplace that prized Malik’s particular skills.

Two and a half years after his departure from Ranbaxy, he became chief operating officer of Matrix Laboratories, a drug company in Hyderabad, founded by an Indian industrialist. Some of his Ranbaxy colleagues followed him. Together, they helped build Matrix into the world’s second-largest producer of active ingredients, with a particular focus on the AIDS drugs being purchased for the PEPFAR program. There, Malik was essentially perched on top of a new ecosystem, one created by the promise that Dr. Yusuf Hamied of Cipla had made to the world. Indian companies could make mass quantities of effective drugs at bargain-basement prices, while still following all the good manufacturing practices required by Western regulators.

As to how Indian companies could pull off such a feat, Dr. Raghunath Anant Mashelkar, a renowned evangelist for Indian science, advanced a theory: India’s scientists excelled at rethinking old processes and making them more efficient because of their engineering excellence and experience of destitution. The result, said Mashelkar, was「Gandhian innovation.」One of Mahatma Gandhi’s essential tenets held that the inventions of science should be for the public benefit. Because Indians had minimal resources, Mashelkar argued, they had developed a「clever way of doing things」that delivered more benefits to more people at a lower cost.

Some still viewed Indian drug companies as bottom-feeders, living off the remnants of painstaking research and innovation. But Mashelkar explained that「affordable」did not necessarily mean「worse.」It could often mean「better.」At Matrix, Malik’s exceptional results stood out. And it did not take long for the West to come calling.

The Appalachian generic drug company Mylan Laboratories was every inch American. In 1961, two army vets launched it in an abandoned ice skating rink in White Sulphur Springs, West Virginia. The company became known for its ethos, as articulated by one of its founders, Mike Puskar:「Do it right, or don’t do it at all.」Its flagship plant, in Morgantown, West Virginia, which sits on twenty-two acres, became one of the world’s largest. Its size and importance led the FDA to establish an almost continuous presence there. As the company-sponsored book Mylan: 50 Years of Unconventional Success recounted, an FDA investigator would perch on a ladder and draw a white-gloved finger across the top of the manufacturing equipment. (Regulations required that all surfaces be dust-free.) Company executives let out a sigh of relief once the gloved finger came up「white as ever.」

The plant required its technicians to pay keen attention to detail. Prospective employees were shown a fifteen-minute video (unrelated to drug making) and then quizzed on what they’d seen: What came first? What came second?「In a GMP [good manufacturing practices] environment, you want them to do it the way they’re instructed to do it,」explained Kevin Kolar, Mylan’s former vice president of manufacturing technical support.「If someone makes a mistake, an investigation has to be launched.」

Any responsible drug maker had to try to minimize risk. But by late 2005, Mylan’s CEO, Robert Coury, was confronting the ultimate wild card: Mylan was losing market share to Indian drug companies that made their own active ingredients in-house and operated at rock-bottom costs. By contrast, Mylan was ordering ingredients from Chinese and Indian suppliers. Mylan couldn’t beat their price—unless it joined them and went global.

Coury turned to one of Mylan’s ingredient suppliers, Matrix Laboratories. In December 2005, he met Matrix’s chairman in a New Jersey airport lounge, and the two men hammered out a deal on a cocktail napkin. Mylan would become the first U.S. company to buy a publicly traded Indian company. The deal, which closed in January 2007, gave Mylan a global platform. But perhaps Mylan’s greatest asset from the acquisition was Rajiv Malik himself, who became Mylan’s executive vice president in charge of global technical operations. He brought a number of his tried-and-true team members who’d been with him at Ranbaxy.

At Mylan, he became part of an American executive team. Alongside Coury sat Chief Operating Officer Heather Bresch, the daughter of West Virginia Democratic governor Joe Manchin (now senior U.S. senator). The Indians and the Americans liked to describe the integration of Matrix and Mylan as seamless.「Bresch and Coury saw in the Matrix team a mirror image of Mylan’s: they were ambitious, hard-working, and committed to quality,」as Mylan’s company-sponsored book recounted. By the time the deal closed,「we started speaking the same language,」Malik said. At their first celebratory dinner, they all ate Indian food, which most of Mylan’s executives had never sampled, reared as they were on meat and potatoes.

Yet the differences between the two teams were as real as the different worlds from which they’d come. In India, generics companies were star performers whose every flicker of stock price got breathless coverage by the business press. In the United States, generic drug companies operated with relative anonymity. When Malik eventually settled in a Pittsburgh doctors’ community, he noted with surprise:「Nobody fucking knows Mylan.」

But a more consequential difference between Malik’s past employers and his new one was the companies’ orientation toward quality. In theory, all companies that made drugs for highly regulated markets operated inside a triangle of cost, speed, and quality. Of those, quality was supposedly a fixed point, its requirements set by regulation. Manufacturing processes had to be transparent, repeatable, and investigable, without exception or deviation. But generic drug makers, under enormous pressure to reduce costs and speed up development so that their applications were first, faced a central tension: How low could they slash their costs? And how quickly could they move before quality began to suffer?

Some in the industry claim that it costs about 25 percent more to follow the good manufacturing practices required for regulated markets like the United States. That leaves companies with difficult choices. What if a sterile mop costs $4 (far more than a regular one), and in a typical day you are supposed to use nine mops? What if your customers want a vaccine for 4 cents a dose but it costs 40 cents to make? But the central problem is the generic drug business model itself. How can you maintain quality when a brand-name pill that costs $14 one day is going to cost 4 cents as a generic the next day? This dynamic「doesn’t motivate you to invest」in maintaining high manufacturing quality, as Malik himself acknowledged.

In the face of this conflict, company culture mattered. Malik and his team had gotten their training at Ranbaxy, where the posters on the office walls exhorted employees to push toward the company’s goal of reaching $1 billion in U.S. sales by 2015. But Malik had landed in a different culture. The posters in Mylan’s conference room emphasized:「Discover why at Mylan quality isn’t just a claim, it’s a cause we’ve made personal.」Mylan was so committed to its image of quality and transparency that it eventually built a glass-walled headquarters in Canonsburg, Pennsylvania, and gave its executives partly transparent business cards.

At Mylan, Malik was tasked with doing what he had always done: navigating an array of obstacles in the laboratory; filing applications swiftly enough to keep the pipeline full; and ensuring that these efforts passed muster with the world’s toughest regulators. But he was doing it all from the glass-walled headquarters of an American company that anticipated, and was accustomed to, continuous oversight.

Patients tend to assume that their generic drugs are identical to brand-name drugs, in part because they imagine a simple and amicable process: as a patent expires, the brand-name company turns over its recipe, and a generic company makes the same drug, but at a fraction of the cost, since it no longer has to invest in research or marketing. But in fact, generic drug companies fight a legal, scientific, and regulatory battle, often in the dark, from the moment they set out to develop a generic. Mostly, their drugs come to market not with help from brand-name drug companies, but in spite of their efforts to stop them.

Brand companies often resort to「shenanigans」and「gaming tactics」to delay generic competition, as the exasperated FDA commissioner Scott Gottlieb put it. They will erect a fortress of patents around their drugs, sometimes patenting each manufacturing step—even the time-release mechanism, if there is one. They may make small alterations to their drugs and declare them new, to add years to their patents, a move known as「evergreening.」Rather than sell samples of their drugs, which generic makers need in order to study and reverse-engineer them, brand-name companies will withhold samples, which in 2018 led the FDA to begin publicly shaming the companies accused of such practices by posting their names on its website.

To successfully launch a product, generic drug companies must tread in reverse through this obstacle course. Once a generic company zeroes in on a molecule, and its scientists figure out how it operates in the body, its lawyers get to work to establish how well protected it is legally. The next step takes place in the laboratory: developing the active pharmaceutical ingredient by synthesizing it into ingredient form. That alone can take several years of trial and error. Once successful, the finished generic has to take the same form as the brand, whether that be pill, capsule, tablet, or injection. Formulating it requires additional ingredients known as excipients, which can be different, but might also be litigated.

Then comes testing. In the lab, the in-vitro tests replicate conditions in the body. During dissolution tests, for example, the drug will be put in beakers whose contents mimic stomach conditions, to see how the drugs break down. But some of the most important tests are in-vivo—when the drug is tested on people.

Brand-name companies must test new drugs on thousands of patients to prove that they are safe and effective. Generic companies have to prove only that their drug performs similarly in the body to the brand-name drug. To do this, they must test it on a few dozen healthy volunteers and map the concentration of the drug in their blood. The results yield a graph that contains the all-important bioequivalence curve. The horizontal line reflects the time to maximum concentration (Tmax) of drug in the blood. The vertical line reflects the peak concentration (Cmax) of drug in the blood. Between these two axes lies the area under the curve (AUC). The test results must fall in that area to be deemed bioequivalent.

Every batch of drugs has variation. Even brand-name drugs made in the same laboratory under the exact same conditions will have some batch-to-batch differences. So, in 1992, the FDA created a complex statistical formula that defined bioequivalence as a range—a generic drug’s concentration in the blood could not fall below 80 percent or rise above 125 percent of the brand name’s concentration. But the formula also required companies to impose a 90 percent confidence interval on their testing, to ensure that less than 20 percent of samples would fall outside the designated range and far more would land within a closer range to the innovator product.

After the active ingredients are manufactured, the additional ingredients chosen, and the principal laboratory and clinical tests conducted, the formula then moves to the manufacturing floor to see if it can be made on a commercial scale.

As the manufacturing runs become larger, the processes become harder to control. If something can go wrong, it will. You can build a fortress of current good manufacturing practices around the drug-making process and still「shit happens,」as Malik liked to say. Conscientious manufacturers try to protect against past disasters and prevent new ones. But because manufacturing plants are operated by humans, the systems will break down, no matter how perfectly designed they are. For example, Johnson & Johnson’s epilepsy drug was fine until the company stacked it on wooden pallets that likely leached solvents into the medicine. At Mylan’s Morgantown plant, one lab technician left a note for another stating that he had to「rig」a hose on the equipment to get it to work properly—a word choice that easily could have shut down the plant had an FDA investigator stumbled across it and suspected fraud instead of primitive problem-solving.

The only remedy for this variability is for plants to adhere scrupulously to good manufacturing practices and create real-time records of each drug-making step. The resulting data serve as a blueprint for finding and fixing the inevitable errors, a process that FDA investigators scrutinize. How well and how closely did the company investigate itself? The goal is to address a problem「in a way that it never happens again,」as Malik explained.

As Malik confronted these challenges, he proved that he was more than a formulation wizard. He was adept at remaking himself. He rose swiftly at Mylan to chief operating officer. Bresch, in turn, became CEO, and Coury was elevated to executive chairman. Malik oversaw a swelling operation in India, where the company would soon grow to have twenty-five of its forty global facilities and over half of its 30,000 employees.

In many ways, Malik took Mylan by storm. He reoriented the company toward India and helped create competition between the research and development teams in Morgantown and Hyderabad. Within three years, the number of drug applications Mylan submitted to the FDA tripled and approvals doubled. But Malik was also careful to emphasize the importance of quality and summed up this priority for employees in typical fashion:「If you miss something in the quality space, we don’t live with that shit.」

His rapid ascent seemed proof that he’d mastered the tensions between cost, quality, and speed, using cleverness, as the innovation expert Mashelkar had put it. But Mashelkar made one important distinction. India’s「clever way」of doing things was not to be confused with an approach that Indians referred to as Jugaad—taking ethically dubious shortcuts to get as quickly as possible to the desired goal. The word connoted a compromise on quality and an approach that should be「banished」entirely, Mashelkar explained to a visitor in his office at the National Chemical Laboratory in Pune.

But at Mylan, as Malik and his team seemed to hit every formulation deadline, some employees began to wonder whether Gandhian innovation was the only explanation for their success.

Chapter 9

The Assignment

AUGUST 18, 2004

Gurgaon, India

At 8:30 a.m., the heat already stifling outside, Dinesh Thakur looked around the conference table at his six project managers and saw tired faces. Some had left their homes hours earlier to beat rush-hour traffic and arrive on time. They knew the meeting was important, but didn’t know its agenda. Thakur was about to give his team one of the stranger tasks in the annals of corporate due diligence, but had decided in advance to keep the true reasons for it to himself.

「We have a new assignment from Dr. Kumar,」he began.「He wants to know if we can substantiate all of the data that we have provided to various countries. This is a retrospective review of our portfolio, and he wants to know how confident we are about the information we have provided to various regulatory agencies in the last twenty years.」

The members of his team looked surprised, yet the assignment fell within their wheelhouse. Their job was to map all of Ranbaxy’s data, so it was only logical to find out if it was accurate first.

Thakur directed their attention to a large whiteboard where he’d drawn a graph. On the vertical axis were all the regions of the world where the company sold its drugs. On the horizontal axis were myriad questions. What products were on the market? When were they registered? Where were the actual dossiers used to register the products? Where was the supporting data? How many batches were sold in that market? What facility manufactured them?

Thakur assigned each of his staffers a region of the world. He directed them to compare the company’s raw manufacturing data for the drugs in those markets against the claims made in submissions to regulators. Did the data match up, or were there any discrepancies? Did the submissions comply with local regulations?

A picture of the company’s entire operations had never been pieced together before. Until then, Ranbaxy had been partitioned. Specific groups worked on product development for different regions, but almost never met to compare notes. No one had a complete picture of how—or even where—the company’s drugs were approved. But Thakur had directed his team to make a multidimensional assessment that spread across the entire globe and stretched back years.

His own efforts began with a visit to the associate director of regulatory affairs, Arun Kumar, who had been directed by Raj Kumar (no relation) to cooperate.

Arun, who worked in the office right above Thakur’s, was waiting with a bemused air.「Everyone knows,」he said, by way of greeting.

「Knows what?」Thakur asked.

「What the reality is,」he said. Arun went on to describe how Ranbaxy took its greatest liberties in markets where regulation was weakest and the risk of discovery was lowest.

「Are you saying that the products on the market in those regions are not all supported by data?」

「Well, not all of them,」said Kumar in a casual tone, flipping through a report on his desk.「We know where the gaps are.」

Thakur was stunned by his nonchalance.「Did you bring it up to management?」

「What for?」Kumar replied.「They already know. In fact, they probably know it better than I do.」

Thakur thought he must have misunderstood. If the applications included known gaps, he asked, how could Arun sign off on them when he was the one certifying their accuracy?

That was part of the problem, Arun explained. Even though he had prepared the dossiers, the regional regulatory heads, like Abha Pant in the United States, could make any changes they liked to any of the applications. They took their orders directly from the top management and signed off on dossiers without Arun’s knowledge or consent.

This was incredible to Thakur. At a company like Bristol-Myers Squibb, the regulatory affairs directors had absolute control over what was submitted to the FDA, and for good reason. When regulatory executives signed submissions, they were asserting the data was accurate. It was a criminal offense to make a false statement on a government record.

「Surely you are not saying what I think you’re saying, right?」Thakur asked.

「There is too much to lose in advanced markets like the U.S. and Europe if you get caught, so it doesn’t make sense to take blatant risks for those portfolios,」Arun explained.「However, [Africa], Latin America, India, that is a whole different story.」

Thakur was dumbfounded.「Who all knows?」

「Everyone does,」Arun said, adding,「Everyone knows where the directives come from.」

「Is there no fear of the repercussions?」

「They are managed,」said Arun.「Everything is managed.」

Thakur was so stunned that he had to end the meeting and leave, just to compose himself.

As he walked through the door of his office, his executive assistant asked,「What is wrong with you? You look like you have seen a ghost.」Thakur collapsed in his chair.

He knew that compliance failures and ethical lapses existed within the brand-name drug industry. After he left Bristol-Myers Squibb, the company’s finance chief and the head of its worldwide medicines group would both be charged with criminal conspiracy and securities fraud for allegedly inflating sales and profits by concealing unsold inventory, charges that were later dropped.

It was one thing to game the stock market or harm shareholders, allegations that would lead the men to reach a settlement with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission, without admitting guilt. But what Arun had just described was another matter altogether. You had to test the drugs to see if they were properly formulated, stable, and effective. The resulting data was the only thing that proved the medicine would cure instead of kill. Yet Ranbaxy was treating data as an entirely fungible marketing tool, apparently without consideration for the impact on patients. It was an outright fraud that could mean the difference between life and death.

Thakur could barely wrap his mind around it. But the assignment he’d been given drove him to return to Arun Kumar’s office later that day.

「There is no point digging up these things,」Arun told him.「You will find yourself out of the company if you go down that path. Tell Raj you have looked into it, and there is nothing more to see.」

「I can’t lie to my boss,」said Thakur.

「What is wrong with you guys who go to the U.S. for a few years and think you have become the moral police of the world?」asked Arun.「Do you think U.S. pharma companies never do such things?」

In his ten years with Big Pharma, Thakur had never seen or imagined such conduct. He was young and somewhat naive, but also stubborn and not inclined to back down.「Let’s get on with it. Where do we start?」he asked impatiently.

Grudgingly, Arun went to a whiteboard and drew a diagram, by region, of the liability that Ranbaxy faced: the United States and Canada on the bottom; Europe next; Latin America above that; India next; and ROW (rest of the world), comprising the poorest African nations, on top.「I’d start there,」Arun said, pointing to the top.

Thakur still felt that he was groping in the dark. He needed numbers. Arun called in his executive assistant to help. Thakur asked the young man what percentage of the dossiers submitted to regulators contained data that did not match what the company had on file. The assistant was evasive:「It . . . varies from region to region.」

「Give me an estimate in each region,」said Thakur.「How about in the U.S.?」

The assistant thought for a moment, then estimated,「Perhaps between 50 and 60 percent?」Thakur could barely breathe. Ranbaxy had faked over half its dossiers to the FDA? And that was one of the better regions?

「How about Europe?」

「About the same,」came the assistant’s reply.

「And India?」

After some hemming and hawing, the assistant answered,「100 percent.」Testing the drugs for India was just a waste of time, he explained, because no regulators ever looked at the data. So the regional representatives just invented the dossiers on their own and sent them to the Drug Controller General of India (DCGI). What was needed for the DCGI was not real data but good connections, which they had, the assistant explained.

The scale of the deception stunned Thakur. He felt physically sick thinking about the patients. Thakur told the men he wanted a breakdown: each product by year, and the problem with each dossier.

As Thakur’s project managers began their analysis—obtaining data, conducting interviews, visiting laboratories and manufacturing plants—the rigid hierarchy within the company proved to be a major obstacle. Not only was Thakur’s team new, but by the unwritten rules of Indian corporate culture, its members were also too junior to question department heads.「We were unwelcome people,」recalled one of the team members, who had been tasked with tracking down data from Asian and Brazilian markets. As a result, they had to operate by stealth and stubbornness. They showed up at the factories unannounced. They waited hours to speak with department heads. They drove hours to distant manufacturing plants. Little by little, as the team members stitched together small pieces of information, they stumbled into Ranbaxy’s secret: the company manipulated almost every aspect of its manufacturing process to quickly produce impressive-looking data that would bolster its bottom line.

Each member of Thakur’s team came back with similar examples. At the behest of managers, the company’s scientists substituted lower-purity ingredients for higher ones to reduce costs. They altered test parameters so that formulations with higher impurities could be approved. They faked dissolution studies. To generate optimal results, they crushed up brand-name drugs into capsules so that they could be tested in lieu of the company’s own drugs. They superimposed brand-name test results onto their own in applications. For some markets, the company fraudulently mixed and matched data streams, taking its best data from manufacturing in one market and presenting it to regulators elsewhere as data unique to the drugs in their markets. For other markets, the company simply invented data. Document forgery was pervasive. The company even forged its own standard operating procedures, which FDA investigators rely on to assess whether a company is following its own policies. In one instance, employees backdated documents and then artificially aged them in a steamy room overnight in an attempt to fool regulators during inspections.

There was little effort to conceal this method of doing business. It was common knowledge, from senior managers and heads of research and development to the people responsible for formulation and the clinical people. Essentially, Ranbaxy’s manufacturing standards boiled down to whatever the company could get away with.

As Thakur knew from his years of training, a well-made drug is not one that passes its final test. Its quality must be assessed at each step of production and lies in all the data that accompanies it. Each of those test results, recorded along the way, helps to create an essential roadmap of quality. But because Ranbaxy was fixated on results, regulations and requirements were viewed with indifference. Good manufacturing practices were stop signs and inconvenient detours. So Ranbaxy was driving any way it chose to arrive at favorable results, then moving around road signs, rearranging traffic lights, and adjusting mileage after the fact. As the company’s head of analytical research would later tell an auditor:「It is not in Indian culture to record the data while we conduct our experiments.」

One of Thakur’s team members, who’d been thrilled to join Ranbaxy months earlier, found himself in a paradoxical situation. He had no data indicating the drugs weren’t safe, but he had no reliable data proving that they were. He’d go home after work and urge his relatives and loved ones not to buy any Ranbaxy products.

Thakur worked fourteen-hour days. He tried to build spreadsheets for each market: data the drugs had been filed with, data the company had sent to regulators for every approved product, existing data to support those claims. He would stay in the office till 9:00 p.m., preparing a work plan for the next day. At home, despite Sonal’s objections, Thakur would descend to his basement office and work until midnight, trying to synthesize the data flowing in from his team. As was typical, he was vague about the project, and Sonal didn’t ask. Nor did he ask himself the larger question about the professional ramifications of investigating his own company. Had he taken that single step back, he might have seen how perilous the project actually was.

Instead, he kept trying to wrap his mind around the scale of the emerging crisis. How could there be so much deception? Was there even a name for this behavior, which extended so far beyond what he’d ever imagined? Finally, after days of work, a word came into his mind, one that seemed to clarify what he was learning. Criminal. Yes, that was it. He was uncovering nothing short of a global crime.

After weeks of exhaustive research, Thakur brought his team’s preliminary findings on the Latin American, Indian, and ROW markets to his boss, Raj Kumar.

It was 7:30 a.m., the time Kumar usually got to work, and they met in his office. The hallways were still quiet. Thakur placed some preliminary spreadsheets in front of Kumar. They showed that numerous drugs had never been tested properly, if at all, and had no underlying data to support the company’s claims. Kumar perused them in silence.「This can’t be right,」he finally said. It seemed impossible that Ranbaxy had filed dossiers on drugs the company hadn’t actually tested. Kumar had never heard of anything like it.「You must have missed data.」

「We’ve looked, and it doesn’t exist,」Thakur insisted.

「You have to go back and check again,」Kumar asserted.「This has got to be wrong.」

To Kumar, the only plausible explanation was that Thakur had either overlooked existing test results or misinterpreted the results he’d found. Otherwise, there was no precedent for what Thakur had uncovered. In the coming weeks, Kumar sent him back to check and recheck so many times that finally Thakur organized a meeting with the team so that Kumar could hear from them directly.

They, too, had been stunned by their own findings and remained at a loss for how to think about what they’d found.「Corruption to me was more Enron, more how you fudge earnings,」Dinesh Kasthuril recalled. Venkat Swawinathan had expected「nepotism and inefficiency.」But doing things that jeopardized people’s lives was another thing altogether.

Once Kumar heard from each member of Thakur’s team, it finally sank in. The company was committing fraud and potentially harming patients on a global scale. He distilled the information into a four-page report for the CEO, Brian Tempest. Though blandly titled「Inadequate Dossiers filed in various countries for various products」and written in the gray lingo of corporate quality assurance, the report was explosive. It laid bare systemic fraud in Ranbaxy’s worldwide regulatory filings.「The majority of products filed in Brazil, Mexico, Middle East, Russia, Romania, Myanmar, Thailand, Vietnam, Malaysia, African Nations, have data submitted which did not exist or data from different products and from different countries.」

Kumar’s document explained that while the company had slashed production costs and used the cheapest ingredients in those markets, it submitted data from the drugs that had been made for more regulated markets, a dangerous bait-and-switch that concealed the low quality. The report also noted that active pharmaceutical ingredient (API) that failed purity tests had been reblended with good API until it met requirements.

The report noted the「non-availability」in India and Latin America of validation methods, stability data, and bioequivalence reports. In short, Ranbaxy had almost no method for confirming the content of drugs in those markets. For example, the data collected by Thakur’s team showed that of the 163 drug products approved in Brazil since 2000, almost all had been filed with phony batch records and stability data that did not exist.

The report noted that in a majority of regulatory filings, Ranbaxy had「intentionally misrepresented」small research and development batches (some two thousand doses) as exhibit batches one hundred times the size, and then deceptively performed crucial tests for bioequivalence and stability on the smaller, easier-to-control batches. The result was that its commercial-sized batches had not actually been tested before being sold, putting millions of patients at risk.

In an email to Tempest marked「confidential」accompanying the report, Kumar noted that lack of adherence to regulation was only part of the problem.「It appears that some of these issues were apparent over a year ago and I cannot find any documents which sought to address these concerns or resolve the issues.」In closing, he made clear that his ultimate loyalties lay not with the company but with the truth.「I can not allow any information to be used for any dossier unless fully supported by data,」he wrote, adding:「With your permission, I would like to take advice from legal counsel in London as to my current responsibility and indemnity with respect to the above issues.」

In response, Tempest assured Kumar that the company would do the right thing.

Though the picture was grim, Kumar confided to Thakur that he believed he could fix the problems, if given the authority.

Thakur’s findings were not news to Ranbaxy’s top executives. Just ten months earlier, in October 2003, outside auditors started investigating Ranbaxy facilities worldwide. In this case, the audits had been ordered up by Ranbaxy itself. This was a common industry practice: drug companies often hired consultants to audit their facilities as a dry run to see how visible their problems were. If the consultants could find it, they reasoned, then most likely regulators could too.

The fact-finding mission by Lachman Consultant Services left Ranbaxy officials under no illusion as to the extent of the company’s failings. At Ranbaxy’s Princeton, New Jersey, facility, auditors found that the company’s Patient Safety Department barely functioned and training was essentially「non-existent.」The staff had no written protocols for investigating patient complaints, which piled up in boxes, uncategorized and unreported. They had no clerical help for basic tasks like mailing out the patients’ samples for testing.「I don’t think there’s the same medicine in this medicine,」was a common refrain from patients. Even when there were investigations, they were so perfunctory and half-hearted that expiration dates were listed as「unknown,」even when they could easily have been found from a product’s lot number.

An audit of Ranbaxy’s main U.S. manufacturing plant, Ohm Laboratories in New Jersey, found that the company, though required to report adverse events to the FDA, rarely did so. There was no system to capture patient complaints after hours, and no global medical officer to ensure that any potential negative consequences for patients were being monitored. The consultants from Lachman urged Ranbaxy to address these problems globally. Ranbaxy’s initial reaction to the findings was to question the number of hours, and the resulting invoice, that Lachman had sent for its work.

The picture was not a lot rosier overseas. At a plant called Mohali, in India’s northern state of Punjab, auditors found so little control of records that twenty people were authorized to change test results. Over 120 different batch records had been reprinted, which Ranbaxy claimed was due to faulty dot matrix printers that had not been replaced. If the goal of good manufacturing was total control, this was about as wild and careening a picture as one could get.

The head of Lachman later sent a top company official a wide-ranging plan for corrective action. Among the suggestions was to establish a training program for workers, including a module entitled「Creating a Culture of Trust, Ethical Behavior, and a ‘Quality First’ Mindset.」But Ranbaxy refused to implement the proposed ethics training after a company executive deemed it unnecessary.

Other employees were growing suspicious. In May 2004, three months before Thakur embarked on his research, Dr. Kathy Spreen had joined Ranbaxy’s U.S. office as executive director of clinical medicine and pharmacovigilance. A fifteen-year veteran of Wyeth and AstraZeneca, she was there to help launch the company’s brand products division, which planned to create new dosages and formulations of existing drugs. Spreen envisioned her job as that of a regulatory coach to help guide Ranbaxy through the FDA’s intricate system.

At first, the company’s manufacturing prowess seemed to exceed her expectations. She had been on the job a few months and was preparing slides for a presentation about the company’s launch of Riomet, a version of the diabetes drug metformin, when she noticed something remarkable. The data showing the concentration of Ranbaxy’s drug in the bloodstream appeared to match that of the brand name perfectly. Look how good this company is, she remembered thinking. The bioequivalence data is superimposable on the drugs we are modeling.

About a month later, while comparing the data for Sotret, the company’s version of the acne drug Accutane, a formulation the company had secretly wrestled with, Spreen found it almost identical to the brand-name data. That’s when she began to worry. If it’s too good to be true, it’s probably made up.

She knew that data is tricky. Even two batches of the same drug made by the same company at the same plant under the exact same conditions will have slight variations. Test results for a similar or copycat drug made by a different company with a different formula should look different.

With her suspicions aroused, Spreen began asking her Indian counterparts to send underlying data that supported their test results. They repeatedly promised that the information was on the way. When it didn’t arrive, she got excuses: it was a「mess,」they’d be「embarrassed.」She begged her colleagues in India,「I don’t care if it’s written on the back of toilet paper. Just send me something.」But no data came.

Spreen kept thinking that if only she could explain American regulations more clearly, Ranbaxy’s executives would understand. But no amount of explaining seemed to change how the company did business. Indian executives approached the regulatory system as an obstacle to be gamed. They bragged about who had most artfully deceived regulators. When sales of a diabetes drug were sluggish, one executive asked Spreen if she could use her medical license to prescribe the drug to everyone in the company so they could record hundreds of sales. Spreen refused.

When she asked Ranbaxy’s global manufacturing director to send documentation showing that an antibiotic acne gel was made with good manufacturing practices, he offered to send her an「impressive looking」certificate. To Spreen, it sounded like an offer to send her a forged one. She tried to explain that「the look of the certificate means nothing to me unless the FDA says it’s GMP.」

In New Jersey in October 2004, Thakur’s boss Raj Kumar quietly confirmed to Spreen what she had already come to suspect: that crucial testing data for many of the company’s drugs did not actually exist and submissions to regulators had been forged. At one point, she confronted Malvinder Singh, then president of pharmaceuticals, with her suspicions. He told her to be patient and assured her that everything would work out. But for that to happen, the company would have needed to care about compliance and feel a sense of urgency about protecting patients.

That sentiment seemed absent, and shockingly so. In a conference call with a dozen company executives, Spreen expressed her fears about the quality of the AIDS medicine that Ranbaxy was supplying for Africa. One of the company’s top medical executives responded,「Who cares? It’s just blacks dying.」

Like Kathy Spreen, Kumar felt uncertain about what to do next. On a trip back to the United States, he went to see the company’s lawyer, Jay Deshmukh.「I want to talk to you lawyer-to-client,」he said. Deshmukh replied that he represented the company and couldn’t act as a lawyer for him.「You don’t know what’s going on,」Kumar told him, explaining that terrible things were happening inside the company.「I’m afraid for my freedom.」

「I can’t advise you,」Deshmukh said.「I’m not an expert.」After Kumar’s visit, however, Deshmukh made some quiet inquiries and learned about the review that Kumar had launched. It struck the lawyer as extremely hazardous to undertake a corporate self-assessment without proper safeguards. Once that was launched, it would be impossible to undo, and there was no telling where such information might lead.「It’s a bad thing to do with unsophisticated people,」he would later say, as though Kumar had allowed children to play with matches, unsupervised.

For now, Thakur’s analyses moved quietly inside the company. At an executive management meeting in Bangkok, Kumar distributed a spreadsheet prepared by Thakur that listed Ranbaxy’s different markets by region and alphabetically, beginning in Algeria and ending in Vietnam. It had one column for the problems with each drug, another column headed「Risk」—by which Thakur had meant risk to patients—and a third column,「Action Plan.」Thakur had filled in the column for risk to patients with the words「high,」「medium,」or「low,」depending on how much data, and what kind, was missing from the company’s records.

But at the meeting, the company executives reviewing the spreadsheet had misunderstood the column as meaning risk to the company. In the「Action Plan」column, two executives—the heads of global marketing and regulatory affairs—had scrawled notes in the margins. These made clear that the company would decide whether to discontinue the drugs or temporarily withdraw them from the market for retesting by weighing the risk of being found out against the risk of losing market share. The risk to patients did not enter into their calculation.

At the end of the meeting, Kumar took the spreadsheets with him that contained the men’s handwritten notes. Whether intentionally or not, he was now collecting evidence.

On October 14, 2004, several months after assigning Thakur to dig up the truth, Kumar stood in the boardroom at Ranbaxy’s corporate headquarters in New Delhi, facing members of the scientific committee of the board of directors. His audience included Brian Tempest; Malvinder Singh, then president of pharmaceuticals; the board chairman, Tejendra Khanna, who had served as the lieutenant governor of New Delhi; Dr. P. S. Joshi, a prominent cardiologist; and several others. The company secretary was asked to leave the room.

Kumar showed the men a PowerPoint of twenty-four slides that Thakur had prepared. It was entitled「Risk Management for ANDA Portfolio.」To some extent, it was a work-in-progress, as it still did not contain U.S. market data. But the presentation made clear that in its race for profit, Ranbaxy had lied to regulators, falsified data, and endangered patient safety in almost every country where it sold drugs.「More than 200 products in more than 40 countries [had] elements of data that were fabricated to support business needs,」the PowerPoint stated.「Business needs,」the report showed, was a euphemism for ways in which Ranbaxy could minimize cost, maximize profit, and dupe regulators into approving substandard drugs.

No market or type of drug was exempt, including antiretrovirals purchased by the United States and the World Health Organization to fight HIV in Africa. In Europe, the company used ingredients from unapproved sources, invented shelf-life data, tested different formulations of the drug than the ones it sold, and made undocumented changes to the manufacturing process. The PowerPoint also noted that the fallout from the Vimta audit, which had initially taken Kumar to South Africa, was already drawing the attention of regulators and could do further damage to the company’s reputation.

In entire markets—including Brazil, Kenya, Ethiopia, Uganda, Egypt, Myanmar, Thailand, Vietnam, Peru, and the Dominican Republic—the company had simply invented all the data. Noting a corporate agreement to manufacture some drugs for brand-name companies, a slide stated,「We have also put our partners (Bayer & Merck in Mexico and in South Africa) at risk by using suspect data in our dossiers.」

Kumar proposed a drastic course: pull all compromised drugs off the market; repeat all suspect tests; inform regulators of every case of switched data; and create a process for linking the right data to the right drugs. A slide entitled「Guiding Principles」laid out what Kumar considered to be the company’s obligations:「Patient safety is our first responsibility. Our products have to be proven safe and effective. A short-term loss of revenue is better than a long-term losing proposition for the entire business.」

Kumar completed the presentation to a silent boardroom. Only one director, a scientist, expressed any surprise about the findings. The others appeared more astonished by Kumar’s declaration that if he was not given full authority to fix the problems, he would resign.

「Can you not bury the data?」one of the board members turned to ask Tempest. No one responded. The silence told Kumar everything he needed to know. Tempest asked for every copy of the PowerPoint to be destroyed and for the laptop on which it was created to be broken down piece by piece. No minutes of the meeting had been created.

Kumar had been certain that Ranbaxy would have to do the right thing after seeing incontrovertible proof that it had done the wrong thing for so long. Instead, within two days of the board meeting, Kumar submitted his resignation. He had been at Ranbaxy for less than four months.「Given the serious nature of the issues we discussed,」he wrote to Tempest, his only choice was to withdraw「gracefully but immediately.」

But the specter of Kumar’s PowerPoint, one of the most damning internal documents ever created by a company executive, would divide the executives for years to come. Inside the company, it would come to be known as「the SAR」(for Self-Assessment Report). The incriminating document was like a slow-burning fuse, headed straight toward the company’s top executives.

Thakur remained behind. But with Kumar’s departure, he had lost his protection. Three months after the board presentation, the company’s internal auditors arrived at his department for what they called a routine review. They stayed for ten weeks, combing through his department’s books and interviewing staff. To Venkat Swaminathan, a member of Thakur’s team, the auditors were the「secret police of the company. We eventually figured out, this was part of the whole case, and Dinesh was the target.」

In late April, the company accused Thakur of browsing porn sites from his office computer. Thakur vehemently denied doing so. Furious, he got his network administrator to pore through the computer records and found that someone in the corporate IT department had logged into his division’s servers and planted his IP address on several searches.

At home, Thakur told his wife Sonal that he would be leaving the company. Though he didn’t go into details and she didn’t pry, he told her that it had become impossible to do his job.

「What are we going to do?」she asked.

Thakur did not have an answer for her. But given what had transpired, it was clear that he had come to the end of his time at Ranbaxy.

On a Thursday morning, Thakur drafted a resignation letter and printed out the data showing that porn websites had been planted under his IP address. The next afternoon he went to Dr. Tempest’s office, where he’d managed to book a thirty-minute meeting.

Thakur showed him the evidence of computer tampering.「I can’t work in an environment where people are out to get me for doing my job,」he explained. Thakur gave Tempest his resignation letter.

Tempest, though pleasant enough, said,「I understand why you’re leaving.」He told Thakur not to return to his office that afternoon but instead to collect his belongings the following week.

Thakur returned on Monday. As the head of human resources stood watch, he plucked a few photos of Ishan from his desk. He was not even allowed to open a drawer or say good-bye to his group. He was then escorted from the building, where Vijay was waiting in the car. He had been at Ranbaxy for twenty-two turbulent months. His departure took less than ten minutes. He was done—or so he thought.