# Part III A Cat-and-Mouse Business

## 0301. The Global Cover-Up

NOVEMBER 18, 2004

Little Rock, Arkansas

Dr. Brian Tempest and several other Ranbaxy executives huddled by the Arkansas River in plastic ponchos under a driving rain. They were determined to make the most of the soggy event, which included President George W. Bush, three former U.S. presidents, and numerous members of Congress. Ranbaxy had donated close to `$250,000` so its directors could be at the opening of the William J. Clinton Presidential Library and Museum.

By their side was Dr. Agnes Varis, the founder and CEO of AgVar Chemicals, who had been serving for some time as their political chaperone in the United States. A major Democratic Party donor with a deep knowledge of America’s drug industry, she was a longtime friend of the Clintons and had taken Ranbaxy executives to parties at their Westchester home. When Clinton’s presidency ended, Varis had put a political bumper sticker on her chauffeured Bentley that read I MISS BILL. She had contributed nearly `$500,000` to the Clinton Foundation for the library dedication.

Using the event as leverage, Ranbaxy did everything possible to link itself to the former president. The company released a public statement touting its「close association」with the Clinton Foundation and their shared goal of「providing pharmacotherapy to patients stricken with AIDS in financially depressed countries.」A subsequent Ranbaxy newsletter described the company as an「honored guest at this momentous event.」Though certainly an overstatement, it was true that Clinton took extraordinary steps to thank Ranbaxy for its role in making cheap HIV drugs for Africa.

Within six months of the library dedication, Clinton returned to India, where he spent more time with Malvinder Singh and other Ranbaxy executives on an AIDS panel and at a cocktail event. So much face time with the former U.S. president was like jet fuel for the company’s public image—and its bottom line.

From a distance, Ranbaxy’s ascent appeared unchecked. By early 2004, the company’s global sales had surpassed `$1` billion. In the United States, Ranbaxy had become the fastest-growing foreign generics maker, with ninety-six products on pharmacy shelves and fifty more applications before the FDA. Its medicine had become important to the AIDS programs of two American presidents. And the company had big future plans: to reach `$5` billion in global sales by 2012, move from the world’s eighth-largest generic drug company into the top five, and launch its own specialty products.

The company’s marketers spelled all this out in a newsletter, Ranbaxy World, which emphasized the company’s integrity and social commitment. It pointed to new quality initiatives, Ranbaxy’s elaborate code of conduct, and its dedication to making low-cost antiretroviral drugs for poor Africans. As the newsletter stated, the company’s「quest for growth and excellence goes hand in hand with unflinching commitment to integrity in all relationships with employees, customers, suppliers, government, local communities, collaborators and shareholders.」

Beneath this gauzy sentiment, glimpses of a different sort of company were visible. One week after the library dedication, President of Pharmaceuticals Malvinder Singh gave an interview to an Indian website in which he attributed Ranbaxy’s success, in part, to being a「very aggressive marketing company, fighting for a market share at rock-bottom prices and making that model work.」He didn’t explain how the model worked exactly, but went on to say,「Ranbaxy is today what it is because we took the risks.」He would later explain that Ranbaxy had risked being the first Indian pharmaceutical company to set up operations and manufacturing facilities outside of India.

But inside the company, executives were grappling with a different set of risks.

The initial disclosure of fraud at Vimta, the company Ranbaxy had hired to test its AIDS drugs, was like a teetering domino, threatening to topple interconnected drug applications approved by regulators around the world. As charitable organizations asked the company for underlying data to support its claims, the problem confronting Ranbaxy executives had become almost unsolvable. Drugs that had never been tested, or whose tests revealed a failing product, were now due to be reregistered in countries around the world. Much of the raw data didn’t match what the company had filed with regulators. Either it didn’t exist, didn’t make sense, or had been fabricated at some point. A refusal to share the data would trigger further suspicion, leaving the company with two bad options: come clean—which would have disastrous business consequences—or lie more.

The company needed to start testing drugs properly. But that not only risked exposing past fraud but often required a new set of lies. This Catch-22 played out in a torrent of confidential emails in which Dr. Tempest and future CEO Malvinder Singh were often cc’ed and also weighed in. In mid-July 2004, a UNICEF official asked why Ranbaxy had submitted only limited stability data for several of its AIDS drugs. Companies must prove that their drugs will remain stable in a range of temperature conditions. The required tests, which help to establish the shelf life of a drug and measure impurities over time, are conducted in chambers that resemble oversized refrigerators, which can replicate extremes of heat and cold.

UNICEF’s question prompted a round of panicky internal emails. In one titled「Stability Studies—Urgent,」an executive wrote,「According to UNICEF, if we fail to furnish the data by Wednesday evening and do not provide the information requested in the mail below, then we can forget about this tender.」He added,「this tender is worth `$5` million and we cannot take nay chances on it.」

But the only data that Ranbaxy had to give UNICEF was a nonsensical hodgepodge that would raise more questions. The limited testing that Ranbaxy had done on the HIV drugs showed some impurities remaining constant or even decreasing between nine and twelve months, which was technically impossible. As an executive pointed out, these problems「will certainly raise a doubt in the mind of the reviewer . . . we need to revise this number.」

Executives grappled with similar problems in dossiers for markets around the world. In February 2005, a company executive wrote to colleagues regarding the company’s filing in Spain for the antibiotic cefuroxime axetil:「Please advice the way forward. This dossier was scheduled to go in Dec, 04. We have been waiting for your response for the last 2 months. We need to conclude this ASAP.」This email triggered a terse reply from a senior scientist:「During our discussion in Gurgaon on 27th Jan, I mentioned clearly that the data in our Archives and that of the filed one is Differing Entirely. So, I cannot send the Data.」

Months earlier, in September 2004, as the FDA evaluated Ranbaxy’s PEPFAR application for certain AIDS drugs, it asked to see data the company had filed with the World Health Organization. The director of regulatory affairs, Dr. Arun Kumar, wrote to colleagues, including Dr. Tempest:「In case we do not share the data at this stage we will be under question. . . . Reasons for not sharing the data on existing batches could be difficult to explain.」He added,「We are crossroads becoz adequate data has not been generated on the products as per WHO requirements.」

This was particularly problematic, as the company had assiduously cultivated its relationship with the FDA. In the intense debate over what data to share with the agency, Ranbaxy’s U.S. president, Dipak Chattaraj, noted in an email that the two top officials in the FDA’s Office of Generic Drugs「are so well disposed towards Ranbaxy that trying to [be] difficult with them can only cost and not help us.」

The company’s problems with the FDA were far bigger than just the drugs intended for Africa. Ranbaxy had not properly tested the stability of almost any drugs on the U.S. market. The most basic good manufacturing practices require continuous monitoring of drug quality. Drug stability must be tested at intervals called「stations」: three months, six months, nine months, and so on. So long as a drug is on the market, that data has to be filed in an annual report with the FDA. One is never out of data, because obtaining it is simply part of the process.

But the company had hit an impasse, leaving its executives to confront the fact that they had virtually no thirty-six-month stability data to submit for any U.S. commercial batches. This was more than an「oops.」It was the equivalent of trying to read a roadmap upside down—after you’ve already crashed the car into a tree.

In frantic emails, executives grappled with this seemingly insurmountable problem. Abha Pant sent a terse email to her colleagues:「This is a very serious issue. I do not know how are we going to file the Annual Reports and what reasons are we going to give to the [FDA] for not submitting the stability data. . . . We need all this data and there is no way out.」

Even as company executives resolved to start testing the drugs in「right earnest,」as one of them put it, a similar crisis was playing out in dossiers around the world. By 2005, twenty-two high-priority products faced reregistration in at least one country. All had been made at Ranbaxy’s Dewas manufacturing plant in Madhya Pradesh, and none had been tested adequately. Arun Kumar explained to his colleagues in an email,「For most of the products the data is not available, and also the archival data is not there.」In short, they had never been tested.

In assessing the task before them, a quality assurance director at Dewas wrote to his colleagues in February 2005, cc’ing Brian Tempest,「We are going to start almost on zero basis in case of majority of products where we do not have required stability data. The task seems very difficult.」In other words, drugs already on the market had to be tested from the ground up. By then, Tempest had sent the director of global quality an urgent email:「There will be no business left to pay your salaries unless we get on top of the stability work for re registrations.」

Previously, the company had taken data from fledgling research and development batches and falsely represented in filings that it came from much larger exhibit batches, which are harder to control. One troubling drug was the co-amoxiclav suspension, the antibiotic that is often used to treat ear infections in children, the same medication that had failed to cure Thakur’s son. Ranbaxy had registered the drug with a twenty-four-month shelf life in almost thirty countries, but tests showed that its shelf life was actually closer to eighteen months. In reregistering the drug, a senior consultant noted in an email, cc’ing Tempest and Malvinder Singh, it would be「useful」to have a「plausible explanation for this reduction in shelf life」when dealing with the regulatory agencies.

If most executives were seeking guidance on how best to lie to regulators, others were concerned about the fraud they were expected to commit as part of their job. Some balked at filing false data. Others flat-out refused to participate in illegal acts. However, sometimes even the most scrupulous employees ended up being drafted, unwittingly, into the company’s fraudulent schemes. Most Ranbaxy executives were expected to carry suitcases full of brand-name drugs when they traveled to India. At Ranbaxy’s New Jersey headquarters, suitcases purchased at the local Walmart were kept packed with drugs, waiting for the next traveler to India. The suitcase-toting seemed innocent enough. Most executives assumed that the drugs were needed for research and development.

Generic drug companies often study small amounts of a brand-name product in order to reverse-engineer it or to reference it as a point of comparison in applications. But proper channels for purchasing and transporting such drugs are well established and became ironclad with the 2001 passage of the Patriot Act. Personal transport of drugs was technically illegal and a form of smuggling. To the dozens of employees pressed into ferrying the drugs, often on an emergency basis, it seemed like a minor shortcut, possibly to cut shipping costs, avoid quarantine, or speed up delivery.

In one year alone, seventeen executives took undeclared drugs from the New Jersey office through Indian customs, four of them doing so multiple times. The most frequent couriers included the company’s U.S. president and even its U.S. executive director of regulatory affairs, Abha Pant, who was responsible for ensuring that the company followed the rules.

At Ranbaxy, top executives skirted these regulations and sometimes oversaw the illegal ferrying of drugs at the very moment when the company faced deadlines to resubmit data to regulators. Some executives came to suspect that the company was using the brand-name samples as a substitute for its own, in order to generate data showing how closely Ranbaxy’s drug matched the brand it was seeking to replicate. This would explain the urgency surrounding the drug runs, especially when some Ranbaxy staffers strenuously resisted being used as drug mules.

In May 2004, a regulatory project manager refused to take French brand-name samples to India. He protested in an email,「I will NOT be bring any samples with me, not only I believe is this company policy but I personally do not feel comfortable bringing samples in this manner.」An executive pushed back:「It is critical that the samples are carried by you. We cannot delay it.」The employee flatly refused.

Malvinder Singh, then the company’s worldwide head of pharmaceuticals, got involved. Through his secretary, he asked when the samples would reach Gurgaon.「These products have been sitting in our London office and it is a pity to see that nobody takes ownership of them.」

This triggered a response from the company’s president of global pharmaceutical business:「Dear Malvinder, I need to explain to you how labour laws work within Europe. As taking these samples to India is in principle illegal we cannot force people to do so. . . . Normally however we find our people willing to take the risk.」So important was this to the company’s business that the executive then went on to make an extraordinary suggestion to Singh: that since Tempest and Singh had been passing through the United Kingdom on a regular basis,「[I] would ask you to in future also make yourself available for carrying samples back.」Other senior executives were also pressed into service.

In the event that they were caught, those who carried the drugs for Ranbaxy were given a letter claiming the products were for research and development and had no commercial value. In June 2004, one executive got stopped by Indian customs with hundreds of packs of an antinausea drug, Kytril, worth thousands of dollars that he hadn’t declared. The drugs were seized. One Ranbaxy executive noted internally that「in the absence of correct documents this is considered as an illegal way of bringing the medicine in to India.」

The lies and efforts to conceal them absorbed the energies of the entire company. In August 2004, the company’s top executives, including Tempest and Malvinder Singh, held a meeting in the executive conference room. On the agenda, according to emails, was the「strategy for filling gap between requirement & availability.」In other words, how were they going to submit data they didn’t have?

In September 2004, the executives met again and opted for a solution: to move the most important manufacturing for the United States and PEPFAR from the troubled Dewas plant to the newer one in Paonta Sahib, in the hope that by severing links to the past fraudulent manufacturing, regulators would not detect it. Instead, Dewas, which had almost nonexistent quality systems, would remain the manufacturing site for the least-regulated markets, including Brazil, Mexico, Vietnam, and elsewhere.

Publicly, company executives spun this change as a response to big demand from the American market and PEPFAR. In early January 2005, at a meeting of Indian generic drug makers and AIDS activists in Mumbai, Ranbaxy’s HIV and essential drugs project manager, Sandeep Juneja, explained to the meeting attendees that the company’s new strategy would result in its drugs being quickly approved by PEPFAR and reinstated on the WHO list.「We wanted to harmonise everything to the U.S. market and consolidate manufacturing in one place,」he said.「If a product is approved by the FDA, then it is accepted anywhere.」

Two days later, Arun Kumar wrote to a UNICEF official, explaining the shift in the manufacturing site for lamivudine, an AIDS drug:「We have changed the site of manufacture of the product from Dewas to Paonta Sahib facility to facilitate handling high business requirements.」Four days after making that claim, however, as the company prepared to resubmit the data for its antiretroviral drugs to the WHO, Juneja reiterated the company’s real strategy in an email, cc’ing Tempest.「We have been reasonably successful in keeping WHO from looking closely at the stability data in the past,」he wrote, adding,「The last thing we want is to have another inspection at Dewas until we fix all the process and validation issues once and for all.」

But the shift to Paonta Sahib was far from a perfect solution. In some cases, the new studies weren’t going to be completed in time to meet new registration dates. As one executive asked in an email, how were they going to handle the「interim situation,」where regulators were demanding new data that wasn’t ready yet? If the data came from Dewas,「how do we use them in the Paonta dossier?」The answer from a colleague came back:「pl speak to me over the phone. I shall be able to answer yr query.」The answer was almost certainly interim fraud, or temporarily representing old data from Dewas as new data from Paonta Sahib.

However, as Ranbaxy geared up to start testing drugs at Paonta Sahib and redirect the world’s most important regulators to that plant, the company wanted to leave nothing to chance. And legitimate testing—where drug batches can fail and formulas can become unstable—was the ultimate game of chance. Investigating the why is difficult and costly. Good manufacturing practices are so laborious precisely because they require innumerable steps to make an uncertain process more certain. If you have to actually test drugs, how can you best control the outcome? How do you put your finger on the scale each time in order to generate perfect data?

Ranbaxy came up with a rather ingenious, well-hidden solution. Whether it remained hidden would depend, in large part, on the next FDA investigator who walked into the plant. Would it be someone content to look merely at the well-polished surface? Or someone committed to piecing together a mosaic of clues? The company had no way to control which investigator showed up.

But two months after Raj Kumar made his ill-fated presentation to Ranbaxy’s board of directors, the company had a stroke of luck. The next FDA investigator to arrive at Ranbaxy’s Paonta Sahib manufacturing plant in Himachal Pradesh was Dr. Muralidhara B. Gavini.

At the FDA, Muralidhara Gavini, who was widely known as Mike, had distinguished himself in one important respect: he was one of the few investigators not only willing but happy to do foreign inspections in India.

Most of the agency’s investigators did not want to travel there, especially as their colleagues returned with stories of broiling heat, incessant rain, harrowing traffic, hours spent traveling to distant manufacturing plants over pitted, washed-out roads, and the ubiquitous threat of getting sick from unclean water or contaminated food, which forced them to bring suitcases of peanut butter and granola bars. The difficult travel had contributed to a growing crisis at the FDA.

In theory, the agency tried to inspect every facility making drug ingredients for the U.S. market roughly every two years, whether the plant was in Maryland or Mumbai. But the FDA’s actual rate of inspections overseas was closer to once a decade, and the backlog of applications from foreign drug facilities was growing rapidly. The FDA had no obvious solution for who to send to inspect overseas plants and how to pay for it all. The agency was so desperate that it had even explored doing remote inspections, in which the plants would supply videotapes of their facilities. The proposal for inspections by videotape cited「ever-decreasing resources.」

In a system starved for volunteers, Mike Gavini was in high demand. The area around Hyderabad was beginning to develop, and his inspections took him back to his old stomping grounds. He’d grown up in Guntur, south of Hyderabad. Sending Gavini there did not violate any agency rules, in part because there weren’t too many at that point. But it did violate a basic principle. As one of Gavini’s colleagues would later observe,「You never send people to their native area. That’s just Regulatory 101.」Such an arrangement could invite corruption and compromise. But Gavini was eager for a homecoming.

He had first left India in 1972 to pursue a PhD in chemistry at the University of Arkansas. For him, America and the town of Fayetteville, were alien environments. But his work was good enough to land him a job at the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution in Massachusetts, where he continued his research, tracing plutonium isotopes in rainwater. At Woods Hole, he uncovered traces of curium in the sediment of Lake Ontario and presented his findings at a national meeting of the American Chemical Society. Unwittingly, he had revealed runoff from a secret nuclear facility. Amid recriminations, his career as a scientist ended.

With three children to support, he spent the next ten years at a laboratory testing company until a management change left him looking for work again. In 1996, he took a 70 percent pay cut and joined the FDA’s New Jersey district office, where he got paid `$35,000` a year to visit dairy farms and look for evidence of bovine spongiform encephalopathy (mad cow disease). With his PhD and a decade of private-sector experience, he was an「oddball,」as he recalled. By 1999, he was promoted to a position as a compliance officer at the FDA’s Center for Drug Evaluation and Research (CDER).

He may have been out of his depth in Fayetteville and given short shrift at the FDA, but in India he was a bigwig. Not only did he have a PhD, which automatically commanded respect, but he also represented the world’s most powerful regulator. Most of the time, he went alone to the plants—an inspectional「one-man army,」as he put it. He—and he alone—could determine whether to clear a plant to export its drugs to the United States, a project he undertook without clearly defined rules.

Domestic inspections had long followed a clear formula. The FDA’s investigators would show up unannounced at U.S. factories and stay as long as they needed to follow data trails wherever they led.「We walk in, show the badge, give them notice of inspection,」as FDA investigator Jose Hernandez put it. The relationship with the facility was also clear: there was none.「Those guys [in New Jersey] won’t even take a cup of coffee,」as one investigator put it.

But the rules for overseas inspections were muddy at best. Seeking to avoid confrontations that might involve a foreign government and lead to an international incident, the FDA prioritized diplomacy over confrontation. It announced its visits to the plants weeks, even months, in advance, and relied on the companies to act as hosts and travel agents for its investigators, booking hotels and ground transportation. This suited Gavini.

The approach he chose was collaborative. He viewed himself as a partner, educating the companies as to what constituted robust quality systems.「He conducted himself more as a consultant,」one of his colleagues noted. Gavini regarded the FDA and the companies as sharing the same objectives.「We’re not on opposite sides of the table,」he said.「Quality is our goal.」

He tried to improve the companies’ techniques. He taught them how to clean manufacturing equipment properly and stressed「common sense.」The industry, he said,「learned a hell of a lot from me.」His personal measure for each inspection was,「Have I contributed positively at this company? The net result should be positive.」It certainly was. As he inspected, the pharmaceutical sector in Hyderabad grew under his watch, churning out active ingredients and ultimately becoming the bulk-drug capital of India.

Gavini put in ten- to twelve-hour days. He expressed disdain for colleagues who worked shorter hours or filed their reports months after the fact. But on the rare occasion when colleagues accompanied him, they were dismayed by what they saw: the chumminess of his relations with the companies he was inspecting; his direct communications with the executives, in person and by phone; and his tendency to let companies off the hook. He would even send draft versions of his regulatory findings, called 483 reports, to the companies for review before he submitted them officially.

Gavini rejected what he saw as needless secrecy.「I don’t know why FDA investigators keep everything to themselves,」he said.「I discuss every aspect I am writing [with the companies].」This gave companies the opportunity to influence his findings. If the firm said that it would fix its problems, that was good enough for Gavini. In one 2003 inspection report, he even documented how a plant’s managing director had pledged improvements by phone, a promise that he deemed「satisfactory.」

The honor system was a bad way to improve drug quality—at least, according to a report by the U.S. Government Accountability Office (GAO) written in 1998, two years before Gavini started his inspections. The report bashed the FDA for downgrading inspectional findings based on「foreign manufacturers’ promises」to make changes.「As a result, FDA conducted fewer reinspections of these facilities to verify that foreign manufacturers had corrected serious manufacturing deficiencies.」

Gavini was not inclined to treat his countrymen like criminals, he would later explain. But as the pharmaceutical sector in Hyderabad exploded—and FDA investigators returned to facilities that Gavini had previously cleared to find grievous violations—his reputation as a lax investigator spread. Among his colleagues, he came to be known as the quintessential「NAI Inspector」: one whose most common finding was No Action Indicated.

On December 17, 2004, to the delight of Ranbaxy’s executives, Mike Gavini, an investigator they knew well, arrived at the Paonta Sahib plant. He was there for a preapproval inspection to make sure the facility could adequately make two AIDS drugs, lamivudine and zidovudine, for the U.S. AIDS relief program in Africa.

His arrival was not a surprise to the company. As was typical for the FDA’s foreign inspections, a visit had been announced weeks in advance, and the company was involved in planning it. In his summary of the inspection, Gavini noted:「The firm provided transportation to and from the plant」and「accommodations were provided.」

Gavini stayed for five days. Trailing him throughout the plant were many of the same executives who’d been sending panicked messages to one another about the lack of data. Gavini saw none of that. In his inspection report, he noted some unclear instructions in batch records and unclear cleaning procedures. However, he gave unqualified praise to the company’s program of stability testing, which exposes drugs to different temperatures and humidity levels to see how fast they degrade in different environments and what their expiration date should be. He noted:「Stability sample traffic in and out of the chambers was monitored and the stability inventory maintained properly.」

To come to this conclusion, Gavini must have walked directly past a Thermolab stability refrigerator that had been installed seven months earlier. The large walk-in refrigerator was maintained at 4 degrees Celsius. Use of the refrigerator was not noted on any of the company’s applications with the FDA. Had Gavini opened it, he would have found hundreds of bottles of samples that had not been recorded, stuffed inside cardboard boxes.

Why Ranbaxy was using the refrigerator would become one of the most contentious, bitterly fought questions for years to come. But again, Gavini didn’t raise any questions. To Ranbaxy’s nervous executives, he was a dream investigator, either unable to find or not on the lookout for illicit solutions to drug testing.

Not surprisingly, his findings were minimal. He gave the plant a clean bill of health and determined that it was in「overall compliance」with current good manufacturing practices. His conclusion was NAI: No Action Indicated.

Chapter 11

Map of the World

AUGUST 2005

Gurgaon, India

The heat and humidity of monsoon season rolled in, pelting the house with rain. On increasingly fitful nights, as the diesel generator rumbled, Dinesh Thakur lay awake with a map of the world in his head. It was divided into Ranbaxy’s five major markets: the United States and Canada, Europe, Latin America, India, and ROW (rest of the world). Night after night, he visualized the reams of data he had prepared about the drugs in each market, every data set spelling out a hazard to patients that was almost certainly continuing.

The HIV drugs bound for Africa troubled Thakur the most. He knew they were bad. They had high impurities, degraded easily, and would be useless at best in the hot, humid Zone IV conditions of sub-Saharan Africa. They would be taken by the world’s poorest patients, who had almost no medical infrastructure and no recourse for complaints. The injustice made Thakur livid.

Before he’d arrived at Ranbaxy, he assumed that a pill was a pill, manufactured identically for all the regions of the world. Publicly, the company made this claim. It stated that it keyed all its standards across world markets to the most rigorous—those of the United States. But Thakur now knew that the company reserved its worst drugs for countries with little to no regulation, where the chances of getting caught were minuscule.

The FDA, which was now monitoring the quality of all PEPFAR drugs, obviously had no idea this was going on. A month after Thakur resigned, the agency approved Ranbaxy’s Paonta Sahib plant to make AIDS drugs for the PEPFAR program. And in early August, the World Health Organization had restored the company’s AIDS drugs—the ones tested at Vimta—to its prequalified list, to the great relief of AIDS activists who wanted to ensure a low-cost supply of lifesaving drugs.

After leaving Ranbaxy in late April 2005, Thakur tried to convince himself that the company’s medicine was no longer his problem. But his immediate relief had given way to anxiety. He was jobless and piecing together haphazard consulting work as the family’s savings dwindled. Sonal was pregnant with their second child. He mentioned nothing to her about his larger concerns. But night after night he found himself wondering what, if anything, he could do about Ranbaxy’s deceptions. Did he have an obligation to expose them?

The incessant questions took him back to the nighttime stories—and daytime riots—of his childhood. Thakur grew up one hundred miles north of Hyderabad in the lush agricultural town of Nizamabad, where sugarcane, turmeric, and maize grew in abundance. Three generations of Thakurs lived in the family’s ancestral home. His mother was a homemaker. His father, a lawyer, was a civil litigator who did more pro-bono than paid work.

They lived comfortable if modest lives.「Money was not a driver in any sense,」said Thakur. But education was. Thakur and his younger brother and sister were taught by nuns at a strict Catholic school that emphasized discipline and memorization. Each day they took a rickshaw to school along one of the town’s two major roads.

His grandmother, Amba Bai—a bespectacled slip of a woman who wore simple saris—made the biggest impression on Thakur. At home, the principal entertainment for the children were the stories she told every night, drawn from India’s two most famous epic poems, the Ramayana and the Mahabharata. The stories were teeming with characters facing long odds: righteous kings, scheming relatives, fantastical gods, monkey armies.

Each night the characters confronted essential questions of right and wrong and how to live their lives. Would they grab power or choose justice? Would they descend on a road to the underworld or ascend into the light? And while demons and goddesses clashed in his nighttime stories, the real world outside his door was also replete with conflict. In that postcolonial powder keg, perceived slights led to frequent strife between Hindus and Muslims that sometimes led to full-scale riots just outside his door.

His father frequently waded into these skirmishes, racing out to the street to mediate.「I would always ask him, ‘Why are you going out there? It’s not our problem,’」Thakur recalled.「His answer was always, ‘When you see something that’s wrong you have to make sure that you do whatever you can.’」Often, his father would return with cuts and bruises from his peacemaking trips, to the dismay of Thakur’s mother.「She used to absolutely hate him going out there,」Thakur recalled, and inevitably the same discussions ensued:「This is not your problem. They don’t listen to you anyway!」But there was no stopping his father.

For young Thakur, the moral dilemmas his father faced were subtler than those playing out in his grandmother’s stories. If a bad situation is「not your fight,」then what is your obligation? His father’s answer was clear. As a senior lawyer in town, he believed that he had a duty to intervene and serve as a liaison between the people and the justice system, however flawed.

Thakur absorbed this lesson but found it difficult to implement. In eighth grade, one of his friends got suspended from a soccer game for an infraction that wasn’t his fault. Thakur appealed to the physical education teacher on his friend’s behalf but made no headway. So he took his appeal directly to the headmaster. In front of the entire team, Thakur told him that the physical education teacher was being punitive and his friend did not deserve the suspension. The headmaster slapped Thakur across the face and told him never to complain about any of his teachers.「The headmaster did not want to see a teacher challenged by an eighth-grader,」Thakur realized afterward.

The school’s value system, and that of the culture at large, prioritized deference to authority above simple fairness. Thakur rejected this doctrine. He maintained his own value system as he grew into adulthood. His father had gone into the streets to reason with hostile neighbors, with little thought of the dangers to himself. But for a problem that sprawled all over the world, where were Thakur’s streets? With whom could he reason? Thakur knew that others had detected fraud at Ranbaxy, but he believed he was one of the few insiders who understood its full extent. And among that small circle, none had expressed any inclination to address the crime.

Some had even profited from it. His old boss, Barbhaiya, had been given a hefty compensation package on his departure, which Thakur and Kumar believed was to ensure his silence.「The systems in India are so corrupting that even if you are not corrupt, you get corrupted,」Thakur would later say. The middle course for the honest man was to do nothing, which seemed to Thakur to be a version of complicity. There was the option to speak up, but honesty came with peril.

Whistleblowers in India faced mortal risks. Just eighteen months earlier, a project director at the National Highways Authority of India had exposed massive corruption in a highway building project. He was found shot to death by the side of a road. While his death provoked national outrage, it was not all that unusual—especially since whistleblowers in India had no legal protection. As for Ranbaxy, the powerful Singh family had a reputation for being bullies. Their internecine family feuds had even involved gangs of paid thugs, according to published news accounts.

It would have made the most sense for Thakur to do nothing. Being a good Samaritan could backfire in ways that were hard to predict, as it had when he’d rescued the drunk pedestrian from the Mehrauli-Gurgaon Road. That had led to a police officer attempting to frame him as part of a shakedown. The lesson was to keep moving and mind his own business, as his driver Vijay had urged him to do. But Thakur rarely considered the societal norms when deciding whether to act in a way he considered just. He had an absolute set of ethical coordinates that dictated his actions.

On the morning of August 15, 2005, four months after submitting his resignation, he woke up determined to do something. It was India’s Independence Day, a national holiday celebrating the day fifty-eight years earlier when the country had gained its freedom from British rule. Thakur wanted his own liberation from the concerns that had dogged him for months.

He descended to his basement office and opened a Yahoo email account that he had created while weighing his options. Posing as a low-level company scientist and using intentionally broken English, he wrote to officials at the U.S. Agency for International Development (USAID) and the World Health Organization. He stated,「Ranbaxy Laboratories in India is fooling you to get their product on the market with fake data.」He claimed that Ranbaxy was forcing him to falsify data:「I cannot sleep at night knowing that these drugs will be used to cure sick patients in Africa. At best, this drug are ineffective and at worst, they cause adverse reaction and kill people.」He had sent his email using a pseudonym. In choosing one, he reached for a name that invoked power and prestige, in the hope of drawing attention to his cause. He had created an email account using the name of Ranbaxy’s heir apparent, Malvinder Singh.

Each night after that, he went down to his basement computer to check his email, expecting some response. The wait was excruciating. And each day that passed without a response brought a fresh round of pain and self-doubt. He suspected that his email had not been authoritative or detailed enough to penetrate the bureaucracy. So he wrote again, this time more pointedly, to half a dozen FDA officials:「I fear for the poor people in Africa who buy these fake medication from WHO and PEPFAR in the hope of getting better, but no, they do not get better, they get died.」Silence.

He continued to write, adding details and even attaching documents. The silence persisted. A week later, he wrote back to FDA officials, still in the voice of a lowly bench scientist, but this time with more detail.「Ranbaxy management, including the CEO, Head of business and Head of QA systematically ask people in the lab and plant to fabricate data to support stability. There is no data to support shelf life and the formulation you now approve will be degrade in Zone IV conditions in Southern Africa before it gets to the patients. The formulation is worthless. It produce no results.」

Thakur was relentless—and disappointed. He’d thought that if he could only overcome his fear of speaking up, the world would respond and regulators would descend on the company. But no one seemed to care. Over the course of several days, polite but vague responses trickled back. A secretary from the World Health Organization wrote that the officials he’d contacted were out of the office, but his message had been received「and will be dealt with in due course.」

After two weeks of waiting, he put aside the ruse of writing in broken English and sent a message directly to FDA commissioner Lester Crawford. In a forceful and urgent email, he alleged that Ranbaxy was selling「untested, spurious, ineffective medication.」He noted that he’d written repeatedly to Crawford’s subordinates and had included「documents, e-mail messages exchanged between the senior management of this company, including the CEO.」He finally used the word that had come to him months earlier, as he unearthed the company’s misdeeds.「I plead with you,」he wrote,「to put a stop to this crime.」

This time his message broke through. Two days later, Thakur got a detailed email back from Edwin Rivera-Martinez, then chief of investigations and preapproval compliance in the FDA’s Center for Drug Evaluation and Research. Rivera-Martinez stated that he had Thakur’s「e-mail communications of August 15th, 17th, 27th and 31st」and asked Thakur if he would consent to a conference call. Thakur had planned to stay hidden. He had initially expected to set regulators on the trail but limit his own involvement. It had not actually occurred to him that he would have to do more than that.

The two went back and forth. Thakur declined the call, citing a risk to his family, but attached more documents. Rivera-Martinez responded, reassuring him that he could remain anonymous.「From your emails, we got the impression that you believe that people are being killed by fake medications and you want to stop this from happening,」Rivera-Martinez wrote.「. . . without opening a telephone dialogue with you, our investigation may be significantly hampered.」

Thakur was wary. He wrote back:「Will this conversation be recorded? Who will be with you when we talk? Is there any personal liability for me if I talk to you? What protection do I have from prosecution? What we are discussing here is a crime that was committed by the company.」Rivera-Martinez wrote back that it was far more effective to gather relevant officials for a conference call than to go back and forth on email. He also assured Thakur that his identity would be held in strictest confidence, unless the matter went to court and the FDA was required to divulge his identity.

Hesitantly, Thakur consented to the call. But still wanting to maintain control of the interaction, he tried to school Rivera-Martinez on the best and most secure way to set up the conference call.「Do you have access to publicly available VOIP applications?」he asked in one email.「I mean apps like GoogleTalk or SKYPE? In order to use either of these apps, you only need a microphone and speakers on your computer.」He then sent links for the FDA official to download. But the FDA had its own technology—and its own way of operating.

Thakur ended up phoning in to the agency, as instructed. The conference call lasted about ninety minutes. Rivera-Martinez, who was formal and persuasive, gently asked the questions while staffers from different divisions of the agency listened in. There was a special agent, Douglas Loveland, from the FDA’s Office of Criminal Investigations. Dr. Mike Gavini sat in, as did a compliance officer, Karen Takahashi. They wanted to know where Thakur had gotten his information, how confident he was about it, and what some of the documents he’d shared meant.

In an email afterward, Thakur wrote to Rivera-Martinez, sounding almost disappointed in advance:「If I am successful in proving to you that the medicines that this company sells worldwide are not of the quality the US FDA mandates, I will be satisfied. Whether you choose to take this up further is completely your prerogative. I personally hope you would.」

But in the coming months, Thakur was not satisfied at all. To him, the wrongdoing was black-and-white. He had given proof and expected action. And yet ten days after the conference call, the FDA announced that it had approved Ranbaxy’s application for the first generic pediatric AIDS drug for the U.S. market, zidovudine.「Given all the data you have in your possession today about the criminal activities of this company in registering ARVs with fabricated data, I am confused how the USFDA could give such an approval,」Thakur wrote to Rivera-Martinez.「Does this mean that you have concluded your investigation and decided that Ranbaxy is not guilty of these crimes?」

The bureaucrat wrote back that because the drug had been approved before Thakur made contact, only actual proof of fraud could reverse the decision. Thakur was staggered. He’d emailed the agency reams of internal data and communications that clearly showed top-level executives conspiring to alter test results. If that didn’t count for proof of fraud, what did? It was a question with no easy answer, as he would come to learn.

Over the weeks that followed, the communications between Thakur and Rivera-Martinez unfolded as a cordial, slow-motion, arm-twisting duel, fought almost entirely over email. Rivera-Martinez coaxed a reluctant Thakur to give up more information and be more patient; Thakur goaded and needled Rivera-Martinez to make the FDA take action more quickly and aggressively.

On October 6, Rivera-Martinez sent an email asking Thakur「urgently to call regarding several Agency press releases in the works.」Thakur did not get the message in time. The agency announced two more approvals for Ranbaxy: a diabetes drug, glimepiride, and an antiseizure drug, gabapentin. Despondent, Thakur emailed Rivera-Martinez back, noting that he’d provided as much information as he could,「at great risk to me and my family.」He went on:「The actions of the agency really worry me, since it appears to me that you have chosen to largely ignore the evidence I have given you. . . . If you have already concluded that this company has done nothing wrong, please tell me and at least I would have the satisfaction that I have done my duty.」

He wanted to give up and several times declared as much to Rivera-Martinez. In the wake of the October approvals, he sent the resignation letter written by his old boss Raj Kumar, and his last communications with the CEO, Brian Tempest. Thakur called it「a final gesture. . . . The ball is in your court now Mr. Rivera-Martinez, I cannot do anything more for you or the Agency. I will wait and watch your actions . . . before initiating any further dialogue with you.」

But the dialogue continued. Thakur had remained anonymous. Those in the agency referred to him simply as「M,」or「Mr. M,」short for the name he’d used to first make contact with them, Malvinder Singh. And though Thakur had shared many documents, he had withheld the one that mattered most: the Self-Assessment Report (SAR) that Kumar had presented to board directors. That document was radioactive inside the company and would lead directly back to Thakur. On November 2, Rivera-Martinez wrote back,「During our teleconference . . . you mentioned a risk assessment document that you were asked to prepare while you were at Ranbaxy. . . . A copy of this document may be what we need to focus our investigation.」

The request sparked another concern. Though Thakur had done nothing wrong, he had no lawyer and no immunity.「As you have seen from our two-month long association, my only interest in this is to protect the people who pay for the medicines this company makes,」he wrote to Rivera-Martinez. Before he could share more documents,「I need to have immunity from prosecution,」Thakur warned.

Rivera-Martinez tried to explain that the FDA had no power to confer immunity. But he arranged a teleconference with an FDA criminal investigator who was able to reassure Thakur. With that remaining obstacle removed, Thakur sent Rivera-Martinez the document that Ranbaxy’s CEO had been so intent on destroying: the PowerPoint Kumar showed to a subcommittee of the board of directors. The agency now had its fullest picture of a company that was fraudulent to its core.

Though Thakur didn’t know it at the time, the FDA had found his information credible and had been moving to confirm it. In October 2005, less than two months after he first contacted the agency, Rivera-Martinez’s division had sent a request to the Division of Field Investigations to perform high-priority inspections at two of Ranbaxy’s main manufacturing plants, Dewas and Paonta Sahib.

The five-page assignment memo set out a host of alleged frauds for which the inspectors needed to look. Rivera-Martinez requested a face-to-face meeting with the chosen investigators before they left on their trip. The memorandum also recommended that the investigators collect any documents on the day they requested them, noting that the「informant said that the firm has fabricated documents overnight during inspections.」

The agency needed an unvarnished view of the company. In January 2006, however, Thakur urgently relayed to Rivera-Martinez what he had learned from former colleagues: the senior leadership of the company was「camped out in the plant locations, both at Paonta Sahib and at Dewas,」he wrote, warning of「a massive cover-up effort underway to ‘produce’」any documentation that agency investigators might request. Given what Ranbaxy seemed to know about the upcoming inspection, Thakur demanded to know whether the investigation had been compromised in some way. The answer stunned him: Ranbaxy had been notified months in advance that the regulators were coming, because overseas companies always were. It’s the way things were done.

Chapter 12

The Pharaoh of Pharma

JANUARY 19, 2006

Gurgaon, India

Five months after Thakur first contacted the FDA, Malvinder Mohan Singh succeeded Brian Tempest as managing director and CEO of Ranbaxy, returning the company to the founding family’s leadership. Malvinder was just thirty-three and knew little about the science of medicine. But his own personality and upbringing, as well as his family’s background, made him seem well suited to a competitive industry with a social mission at its core.

His father, Parvinder, had been austere, restricting everything from candy to conversation. He had indoctrinated his sons into their maternal grandfather’s spiritual organization, Radha Soami Satsang Beas (RSSB), from an early age. Parvinder often took his sons and his wife, Nimmi, to the Beas community, where they volunteered as laborers. Though Parvinder sent his children to elite schools, they had few of the indulgences of their peers. At college, the children of the wealthy drove fancy cars, got extravagant allowances, and ate dinner at five-star hotels. By contrast, Malvinder took public transportation, commuted to college by way of Delhi Transport Corporation buses, got an allowance of less than `$10` a month, and ate street food.

Though the Singhs emphasized the ascetic values that had long been central to the family, Malvinder had always been a corporate-titan-in-training, who developed expensive taste and an air of mastery as he grew older. He had been introduced to Ranbaxy’s inner workings while he was a boy. His father would let him browse company reports, hoping he would glean industry trends. During school breaks, Malvinder would tag along with Ranbaxy drug representatives on sales calls to doctors and chemists, riding pillion on the back of their scooters.

He assumed his new role as CEO with ease. His management style was brash, competitive, and ambitious. Malvinder immediately looked around the globe for opportunity. The fawning Indian business press dubbed him「the Pharaoh of Pharma」and hailed him as an「out-of-the-box decision-maker.」Inside Ranbaxy, some viewed him as petulant and immature. He was preoccupied with his own ranking on the Forbes list of India’s 40 richest people. He and his brother Shivinder, with `$1.6` billion in assets combined, had fallen from tenth in 2004 to nineteenth in 2005. This year was shaping up to be even worse, which Malvinder seemed to blame on a lack of employee loyalty. When told that a division wasn’t making its numbers, he would yell at employees,「I want profit!」He later explained to a journalist that his passion for Ranbaxy’s collective mission, to become an international research-based pharmaceutical company, drove his conduct, adding,「We too had a sharp focus on topline and bottomline, which is true for any business organization.」

Malvinder and Shivinder both drove $100,000 champagne-colored Mercedes S-class sedans and collected art and photography. They liked fine clothes, and were prized clients of one of Delhi’s most upscale tailors, Vaish at Rivoli, which boasted of serving the「maharajas of business.」Each morning, Malvinder and his brother, who worked in a different part of the family’s businesses, coordinated their outfits, making sure not to wear the same thing to the same meetings. The listeners of radio station Fever 104 FM voted Malvinder among Delhi’s most stylish, and he even sat as the judge of a Miss India competition.

Interacting with employees, Malvinder liked to quote from his favorite book, The Art of War, the 2,500-year-old Chinese military treatise that he viewed as required reading for anyone in business. Perhaps this was not surprising, since the disputes within his own family over real estate and corporate assets resembled warfare.

For years, the extended Singh clan had lived in the heart of New Delhi at one of the world’s most exclusive addresses: Aurangzeb Road, where mansions—or「bungalows,」as the residents call them—sit on acres of planted gardens behind impregnable walls. In 2006, Malvinder’s mother, Nimmi, and his uncle, Analjit, both of whom lived on the multi-acre family property in separate bungalows, filed complaints with the police against each other. Nimmi alleged that she’d caught Analjit erecting an unlawful wall; in response, he’d hired「huge and bulky」men armed with axes and hammers to intimidate her.「I was attacked, threatened, physically abused by goons, who said that not one member of the family of Parvinder Singh, including grandchildren will be alive,」she alleged to the police. Analjit filed his own complaint against Nimmi and Malvinder, alleging criminal intimidation and assault.

The「Ranbaxy Family Feud」hit the Indian press as the next sensational chapter in the almost two-decade saga of claims and counterclaims between family members over Bhai Mohan Singh’s division of his empire and property. In desperation, Nimmi turned to her sons for help. In less than a month, Malvinder and his uncle announced that the family had reached an amicable settlement. Both sides withdrew their lawsuits, of which there were over thirty going back to the 1990s. Malvinder came off as the family diplomat and peacemaker.

He appeared to be a「spiritual young man,」said an Indian journalist who knew the family well. Eight times a year, Malvinder returned to the small town of Beas in Punjab to visit his guru from the RSSB organization, which focused on reuniting man’s soul with God through meditation. His spiritual upbringing, and his family’s core values of austerity, became part of his brand. Reflecting on his childhood in an interview for Duke University’s business school alumni magazine, Malvinder spoke for himself and his brother:「We agree we were born into an illustrious family, however, we were fortunate to have an environment that was simple, pious, and spiritual. . . . Our family values centered on hard work, high ethics, equity of relationships and humility.」Just six weeks after assuming the leadership of Ranbaxy, Malvinder would need to bring all the enlightened values he liked to promote into an increasingly fraught conflict.

On February 20, 2006, two of the FDA’s most experienced investigators, Regina Brown and Robert Horan, arrived at the Paonta Sahib manufacturing plant in the northern state of Himachal Pradesh. Though they had only six days, they were armed with a confidential assignment memo from Edwin Rivera-Martinez’s division: five pages outlining the frauds alleged by Dinesh Thakur.

Despite Ranbaxy’s lead time and preparation, the investigators found troubling lapses. Raw data was routinely discarded. Patient complaints went uninvestigated. But their most important finding was the one that Dr. Mike Gavini had seen and walked right past fourteen months earlier: the unregistered walk-in refrigerator, set to 4 degrees Celsius, and another one like it that had been added since then. The contents of the refrigerators made no sense. Inside were cardboard boxes stuffed with bottles of unlabeled drug samples.「There were no counts for the items, no test status and no reason for storage given for the over 1000 items on the refrigerator inventory and over 150 items on the second refrigerator inventory,」the investigators noted in their report.

What were the refrigerators for? One drug vial inside was labeled 30 degrees Celsius. Was it in the wrong refrigerator by accident, as Ranbaxy would later claim? Or was every sample in the wrong place on purpose? The investigators asked for a log of the fridges’ contents but were told that none was kept. Later, the company claimed that it did maintain a list of the drugs but had not provided it to the FDA「because we did not understand FDA to have requested it.」

The fridges seemed an unlikely hub of fraud. But in trying to explain away unlabeled samples in unregistered refrigerators, the company got tangled up in shifting explanations. Ranbaxy first claimed that the samples were for「regulatory filings globally,」but its refrigeration had no impact on stability tests. In a seeming contradiction, company officials separately claimed that the bottles were「‘test-on-demand control samples’ used only for ‘reference purposes’ but not used for creating any [official] data.」The FDA noted that「it remains unclear to us what these ‘stand-by’ samples are actually used for.」The investigators also took samples of Sotret, Ranbaxy’s generic version of the anti-acne drug Accutane. The FDA found that the drug degraded far in advance of its expiration date and had lower-than-expected potency.

The following week, Brown and Horan set out to inspect Dewas, one of Ranbaxy’s most troubled manufacturing plants. Mike Gavini had last inspected it in December 2004 and found nothing wrong. This time dozens of Ranbaxy officials trailed behind Brown and Horan, scrambling to respond to their questions. The investigators discovered that Ranbaxy had been discarding original electronic data and had changed the policy to retain it only weeks before their arrival. The investigators even found themselves explaining the basics of good manufacturing: that raw data should not be changed「after the fact or outside of the laboratory operation by someone who was not performing the test.」

Horan and Brown had done their jobs. They’d found critical deficiencies that pointed to much larger issues. The findings were serious, and the company’s explanations were too inconsistent to fend off the FDA. In June 2006, the agency issued a warning letter to the Paonta Sahib plant that looked to the world like a severe rebuke. It chronicled a list of failings: not retaining「analytical raw data, undocumented stability sample test intervals, the unclear purpose of ‘standby samples’ [the drugs in the fridge], the inadequate staffing and resources in the stability laboratory,」and the FDA’s lab results for the anti-acne drug Sotret, which revealed that the drug degraded and lost potency. The agency said that it would not consider any new applications for Paonta Sahib’s drugs until the company demonstrated corrections.

This should have been a serious checkmate, since the company had moved manufacturing of its most lucrative and important products for the United States and PEPFAR to Paonta Sahib. But the FDA’s action did nothing to stop all the drugs that were already on the market, drugs from the plant that had already been approved, or drug applications submitted from other sites. Just weeks before the FDA issued the warning letter, Rivera-Martinez sounded almost plaintive when he wrote to Thakur:「We are under a lot of pressure to approve Ranbaxy’s generic version of Pravastatin [a cholesterol-lowering drug] when the patent exclusivity runs out this Thursday.」In short, the bureaucrat’s hands were tied by the agency’s inexorable machinery: to keep approving drug applications almost no matter what.

Thakur had done as much as he could. Despondent that the FDA was still greenlighting Ranbaxy’s drugs, he tried to focus on his family. Sonal had just given birth to their second child, a girl they named Mohavi. She would be their good luck charm, Thakur told his wife. Yet even as Sonal lay in a private hospital in Gurgaon with her arms around her new daughter, both of them receiving excellent care, she worried. Four days in the hospital would cost a major sum. The Thakurs no longer had health insurance and were living from savings. They had gone from being well situated in the corporate world to a fragile, uncertain existence.

Thakur had not been able to find sufficient employment in India. The consulting work, and the income, came in dribs and drabs. Within a few months of Mohavi’s birth, he was finally offered a job with Infosys Technologies that would require him to travel heavily and relocate to the United States, almost full-time. He felt he had no choice but to take it and tried to convince Sonal to come with him, even petitioning her mother, but Sonal resolved to remain in India with the children.

She had always prided herself on her independence. She was neither helpless nor without resources. Yes, she was in an arranged marriage, had two small children, and wasn’t working. But she had been raised by a mother with a master’s degree in Sanskrit, who had insisted that her daughter get a superb education and be able to make her own way in the world. Sonal had done just that. Once she’d gotten her master’s degree in computer engineering and worked as a software engineer at the Carrier Corporation, she enjoyed the most companionable span of her marriage. She and Thakur had worked and provided for Ishan, side by side.

But the day her husband prepared to leave India for the United States felt like the darkest of her life. Though she had chosen to stay in India, she felt alone nonetheless. Her mother and father lived over eight hundred miles to the south, in Raipur. That morning, unable to find Ishan, she went down the basement stairs to Thakur’s office. She found her husband weeping, with his arms wrapped around Ishan, trying to conceal his heartbreak from his wife. She had never seen Thakur cry. Nor had Ishan, who was asking in a puzzled voice,「Why are you crying, Daddy?」

Taking in the scene, Sonal called out,「Don’t! Dinesh, don’t do that in front of Ishan.」Among all her inchoate fears, the one she fixed on was that the boy might somehow be scarred by her husband’s sorrow. Sonal still had no idea what her husband had embarked on with the FDA, yet the stress of it had settled over their marriage like a fog.

There had always been a divide between them. Even under the best of circumstances, Thakur kept a wall around himself. He was not accustomed to having confidants and had revealed his anonymous contact with the FDA to only one person, his friend and former employee Dinesh Kasthuril. Kasthuril, who assumed that Thakur had just tipped off the agency, thought that was「the right thing to do.」He had no idea that his friend was in ongoing dialogue with the FDA. Had he known, he might have expressed his doubt that anyone in India could personally take on a corporation and succeed.

Thakur was doubting the wisdom of what he’d done. He’d put his family at risk, and he feared for their safety. The Singhs had a reputation for threatening people, and he knew too many of their company’s secrets. Thakur expanded the hours of the security guard outside their house to twenty-four hours a day. He told Sonal that he’d done it because he’d be away. Meanwhile, his disappointment only intensified as he waited for definitive action from the FDA, which seemed either helpless to act or uninterested in doing so.

In all of this, there did seem to be one person who understood what Thakur was going through, shared his goals, and believed in the rightness of what he’d done. Her name was Debbie Robertson, and she was an agent in the FDA’s Office of Criminal Investigations. She wrote to Thakur in January 2006 to explain that she would be his new point of contact at the FDA.

Though Edwin Rivera-Martinez’s division continued to examine whether Ranbaxy was complying with regulations, Robertson’s involvement signaled a new dimension to the case. Her job was to investigate whether Ranbaxy had broken any laws or should face any criminal liability.

Robertson was new to the agency, having arrived in October 2005. But she was a seasoned law enforcement professional who had spent ten years as a criminal investigator at the IRS. As she was junior in the agency, she was handed the matter of Ranbaxy to take another look at it, with the implication that the case was a dog. Robertson was not so sure. As soon as she got in dialogue with「M,」as Thakur was known to the FDA, she was struck by his seriousness and evident intelligence, as well as the significant risks he’d taken in contacting the FDA. In turn, her kind and reassuring emails offered Thakur something that no one else at the agency had given him yet: hope.

Nonetheless, Thakur felt disheartened when he returned to the United States. He’d heard initially from former colleagues that the FDA’s inspections in India had been uneventful, which he feared would spell the end of the road for the agency’s inquiry. But Robertson was reassuring on this point too.「It is actually a good thing that [Ranbaxy] thinks the inspection was uneventful,」she wrote to Thakur.「It means they are not suspicious about anything.」

It had been months since Thakur first contacted the agency. He had watched as the FDA announced one new drug approval after another for Ranbaxy. Debbie Robertson tried to ease his frustration.「Imagine, if you will, that we were able to prove even half of what you have told us,」she wrote to Thakur.「This would bring down the entire corporation. One of the largest in the world.」She added,「To lose on a technicality would be a crime in itself.」As she advised him,「Think of the U.S. corporation Enron and how long that took.」

Thakur wrote back,「Do you believe there will be any concrete action against this company ever? . . . It makes me wonder if all my efforts and troubles were worth anything at all.」

She urged him not to lose hope.「The wheels of justice turn slowly,」she wrote,「but they do turn.」