## Epilogue

In October 2017, an international scandal caught Peter Baker’s attention.

Kobe Steel, a Japanese steel maker, had been caught falsifying data. The company had misrepresented some of its products’ tensile strength, meaning that its aluminum, copper, and steel could not bear loads as heavy as the company had claimed. Instantly, warnings sounded around the world. Were the bridges, railways, cars, and planes that had been built with Kobe steel actually safe?

The public attention surprised Baker. Every day he was out in the world’s drug manufacturing plants, exposing fake data. His inspection reports were publicly available. His findings had harrowing implications for the safety and effectiveness of America’s medicine, not to mention the world’s. Yet his discoveries seemed stuck just below the public radar. Perhaps it was easier to understand the implications of a 500,000-ton bridge collapsing. But what about the consequences of a drug that didn’t work properly? Or that contained harmful impurities or ingredients that hadn’t been tested or disclosed? Of a capsule that released its ingredients in a surge rather than over hours, or degraded too quickly in the heat? To Baker, Thakur, and others who had tried to sound the alarm, poor-quality drugs were the equivalent of falling bridges. The only difference: the collapse was taking place invisibly inside human bodies, with potentially life-or-death consequences.

Those who had spent years investigating the generic drug industry, its trade-offs, and the potential danger to patients resorted to imperfect strategies to safeguard their own health: they tried to avoid taking the drugs that they suspected were compromised. At an industry conference, Carmelo Rosa, head of the FDA’s Division of International Drug Quality, told the audience that he was injured after his boiler exploded and wound up in the hospital. He refused to take generic drugs from several different manufacturers, all of whom were under scrutiny by the FDA for falsifying data.「I like to pray,」he told his audience.「But we shouldn’t have to be praying for this batch to be a good batch.」

An FDA investigator who’d visited Indian plants acknowledged,「Every time I fill a prescription, I think about it.」He believed that low-quality medicine posed the greatest risk for people who took the drugs「day in, day out」for chronic conditions.「The probability is that one of those pills is going to be tainted,」he observed.「You don’t want those impurities in your system.」

Thakur’s lawyer Andrew Beato said that, before he got involved in the Ranbaxy case,「I never once looked at the bag or read the damn label.」But that changed after he began to represent Thakur.「From 2007 on, we had a rule in our house going forward. We’d pay I don’t care what」to avoid generic drugs made overseas. Debbie Robertson had come to the same conclusion.「As soon as I started the [Ranbaxy] case, I wouldn’t let anyone in my family take any Indian generics,」she recalled. In Congress, investigator David Nelson asked seven different FDA investigators who’d been in Ranbaxy’s facilities whether they’d be willing to take Ranbaxy drugs.「They all said no,」he recalled.

Baker swore off all low-cost generics made overseas after his extraordinary inspections at Wockhardt.「If people actually understood,」he told a colleague,「then no one would take [these drugs].」After he left India in 2015, he got a new tattoo, a word written in cursive on the inside of his arm that summed up the requirement he’d tried to enforce:「Integrity.」

Even as the public remained largely in the dark, the invisible battle over drug quality, and the fallout from it, continued. In India, Dinesh and Sonal Thakur never recovered from the strain on their marriage during the Ranbaxy case. By the summer of 2016, they separated and began bitter divorce proceedings. But in another realm, Thakur seemed to find his voice. He wrote increasingly pointed blog posts and opinion pieces about the silence, self-interest, and corruption in India that had allowed bad medicine to flourish.

In February 2018, in a column for an online publication, The Wire, Thakur revisited the self-serving and false statements made about the Ranbaxy scandal by former CEO Malvinder Singh, the company’s board of directors, and「arm-chair」public health experts, who all publicly claimed that Ranbaxy’s failures lay in minor record-keeping violations. He singled out India’s top regulators, who had done little to sanction the company in the wake of the U.S. FDA’s findings. By giving the company a「clean chit,」he wrote, they had acted as a「shield to the fraud at Ranbaxy.」

That same month, India’s top drug regulator, G. N. Singh, was removed from his job, along with his deputy and several other mid-level officers, in response to allegations that they’d been allowed to stay on beyond the five years permitted by statute.

Today the Ranbaxy company no longer exists. In April 2014, Daiichi Sankyo, eager to unload the entity that had caused so much grief, sold the tarnished company cheaply to an Indian generic drug company, Sun Pharma. It did so just as another Ranbaxy whistleblower alerted Daiichi Sankyo to ongoing and elaborate deceit at two of Ranbaxy’s manufacturing plants, Dewas and Toansa. The whistleblower claimed that the plants were swapping out high-quality ingredients for lower-quality, lower-cost ones and maintaining records of the substitutions in a second set of books. He alleged that the company was concealing high impurity levels in some of its medicine by using charcoal to bleach yellow pills white. It hid the degraded ingredients behind ceiling tiles and dumped evidence in a river. The whistleblower also reported nesting sparrows and monkey infestations inside plants where Ranbaxy purchased its ingredients.

Today, under Sun Pharma’s ownership, the Mohali plant has cleared FDA inspections and exports drugs to the U.S. market, but the Dewas, Paonta Sahib, and Toansa plants are still under sanction and the company is「evaluating whether to supply products to the U.S. market in future from these three plants,」according to a Sun Pharma spokesperson.

Meanwhile, Daiichi Sankyo emerged victorious from its arbitration in Singapore against former Ranbaxy CEO Malvinder Singh. Remarkably, former company lawyer Jay Deshmukh, as well as several of Ranbaxy’s outside lawyers, lined up to testify against Malvinder. They detailed the lengths to which he and his allies had gone to hide the Self-Assessment Report from Daiichi Sankyo executive chairman Tsutomu Une. In April 2016, Singapore’s International Court of Arbitration directed the Singh brothers to pay Daiichi Sankyo `$550` million in legal damages, a calculation based on how much the duped Japanese company had overpaid for Ranbaxy’s stock, due to the concealment of the SAR.

The Singhs fought back. They challenged the size of the judgment in a Singapore court, in a case they ultimately lost. By 2018, their lawyers had turned to the Indian Supreme Court and argued that the Singapore judgment was not enforceable in India. They lost there also. The decision led the Singh brothers to relinquish their posts at the head of another family business, a hospital chain called Fortis Healthcare, where they faced new allegations that they’d siphoned `$78` million from the publicly traded company into private family accounts. They also faced a similar allegation from a New York private equity firm, which alleged in a lawsuit that they were「systematically plundering」a division of their publicly traded financial firm, Religare Enterprises, Ltd., to meet personal debts of close to `$1.6` billion. Malvinder denied any「mismanagement or misuse of funds and position at Fortis」and said that any intercorporate deposits between companies were collectively made decisions.

By September 2018, warfare between the Singh brothers broke out into the open. Shivinder filed a petition against his older brother with India’s National Company Law Tribunal, alleging that Malvinder had committed fraud and mismanaged the family businesses, leading to an「unsustainable debt trap.」Just days later, however, Shivinder withdrew the petition, claiming that he’d done so after his mother demanded that her sons enter mediation instead. But the truce did not last long. Within a year, Malvinder Singh would publicly accuse his brother, Shivinder, of physical assault, allegations his brother called「fake」and a「lie.」

Some of those involved in the bitter fight over generic drug quality landed on their feet. With the Ranbaxy settlement completed, Andrew Beato became a partner at his law firm, now called Stein Mitchell Beato & Missner LLP. And Debbie Robertson, after her retirement from the FDA, worked briefly for Beato’s firm as an investigator, but then retired for good.

Others found their way to new posts. In September 2018, Jay Deshmukh, the Ranbaxy lawyer who’d been driven out of the company by Malvinder Singh, became a partner at the law firm of Kasowitz, Benson, Torres LLP, practicing patent law. Altaf Lal, the crusading former head of the FDA’s India office, became a senior adviser on global health and innovation at Sun Pharma, the drug company that bought Ranbaxy. From that perch, he oversees the company’s tropical disease program, including the development of medicine to combat drug-resistant malaria.

By 2015, Jose Hernandez, Doug Campbell, and Mike Gavini had all retired from the FDA. Separately, they each set up shop as consultants, advising companies on compliance with FDA regulations. Hernandez liked to say that Peter Baker—and companies’ fear of him—was making him rich.

Tom Cosgrove, the FDA bureaucrat who in 2017 had downgraded findings against Mylan’s Morgantown plant, allowing the company to avoid a warning letter, left the agency shortly afterward to represent drug companies at a D.C. law firm.

In October 2017, Mylan’s president, Rajiv Malik, faced a new and serious allegation. In an expanded civil complaint that was announced and later filed in federal court, forty-seven state attorneys general accused eighteen generic drug companies of colluding with one another to keep the prices of their drugs artificially high. The complaint, the result of a multi-year investigation, singled out two executives from rival companies as having colluded with one another to fix prices: the CEO of India’s Emcure Pharmaceuticals and Mylan’s Rajiv Malik. In a statement, the company rushed to Malik’s defense:「Mylan has deep faith in the integrity of its president, Rajiv Malik, and stands behind him fully.」It vowed to fight the allegations.

Meanwhile, the FDA continued to unearth problems at Mylan’s plants. In March 2018, the FDA sent eight investigators back to the Morgantown, West Virginia, plant for twenty-five days of inspection. The scrutiny, prompted by whistleblower allegations, uncovered cleaning lapses so serious that the FDA grew concerned about product contamination and possible cross-contamination between drugs.

As the agency weighed the prospect of a warning letter that might halt new applications from the Morgantown plant, Mylan worked urgently behind the scenes to try and establish a back channel to top FDA officials. In June 2018, Mylan’s head of regional quality compliance called an FDA division director on his personal cell phone and asked to meet informally over coffee, explaining that he was doing so at the behest of Mylan’s president, Rajiv Malik. The FDA official sternly rejected the request and documented the encounter in an email to colleagues:「I explained it was inappropriate for him to contact me with this request,」the official wrote, and「I don’t have private meetings with industry, especially when we are in the middle of a review.」

Roughly six weeks later, in August, Rajiv Malik tried directly, reaching out to the same wary official, this time to request a formal meeting. But none of that worked. In November 2018, the agency issued a warning letter for Mylan’s Morgantown plant, citing cleaning failures, the unaddressed risk of cross-contamination between drug products, and a failure to adequately investigate anomalous test results. It was a major rebuke to the company and its flagship plant, both of which had once been industry role models. Mylan issued a response to the warning letter, explaining that it had implemented a「comprehensive restructuring and remediation plan at our Morgantown facility,」and pledged to satisfy the FDA’s concerns.

Included in its plan—which Malik spelled out to the FDA official in the August email where he’d requested a meeting—was to slash manufacturing at Morgantown to「less than half the volume in doses and products generated prior to 2018.」He didn’t mention whether the company would move that manufacturing out of the United States, which would effectively put more distance between its operations and FDA scrutiny.

At Cleveland Clinic, Harry Lever’s instincts continued to prove accurate as he shifted his patients off generics that the FDA had approved—and that it continued to defend. In March 2014, fifteen months after Lever had reported his concerns about generic versions of the beta blocker metoprolol succinate to the FDA, a senior FDA official contacted him to explain that an extensive「multidisciplinary investigation」had determined that the generic drugs were bioequivalent to the brand. The FDA had reached this conclusion in part by reviewing the initial data the companies had submitted in order to get approval (apparently without considering whether the company data might be false).

Less than a month later, however, Wockhardt, followed by Dr. Reddy’s, recalled their metoprolol succinate from the market, with the admission that the drugs were not bioequivalent. Lever had been right after all.

In June 2018, a woman arrived at Cleveland Clinic’s emergency room, suffering from chest pain and shortness of breath. Kristy Jordan, thirty-five, had had a successful heart transplant three years earlier and since then had taken the daily immunosuppressant Prograf to prevent organ rejection. But six months earlier, a CVS pharmacy refilled her prescription with generic tacrolimus, made by Dr. Reddy’s. In the time she took it, she felt progressively worse. At the Cleveland Clinic emergency room, tests showed that she was suffering from organ rejection and had lower-than-expected levels of tacrolimus in her blood, which meant that the Dr. Reddy’s drug wasn’t working sufficiently. Doctors stabilized her.

This time Lever and his colleague Randall Starling were prepared to connect the dots. Armed with the patient’s blood test results, they retrieved her tacrolimus capsules and sent them for testing to a Massachusetts laboratory. Meanwhile, Jordan continued to feel sluggish and never fully recovered her health. In September 2018, she died of a heart attack. Starling said that there was no way to know whether the tacrolimus made by Dr. Reddy’s, and the medical setback that Jordan suffered, contributed to her death. But he pointed out that hospitals are now required to pay penalties to Medicare when their patients are readmitted.「If we learn that part of our efforts to prevent readmissions are thwarted by bad drugs, it’s going to be a very important discovery,」he noted. By February 2019, the Massachusetts laboratory had one preliminary finding: the Dr. Reddy’s tacrolimus released its active ingredient very rapidly, compared with the brand. Testing continued.

In February 2015, Peter Baker left India and relocated to Beijing, where he became the FDA’s sole drug investigator stationed in China, responsible for inspecting over four hundred factories approved to export drugs or drug ingredients to the United States. The Chinese government, operating under the suspicion that any investigator could be a spy, had approved only a handful of visas.

Though Baker knew his every move, email, and phone call would be monitored by the Chinese government, he felt relieved to have left New Delhi behind. He would no longer be the last man standing between American consumers and unsafe drugs. The manufacturing plants he’d be inspecting in China made mostly active ingredients, not finished doses. Most were not sterile facilities. If something slipped past him, an investigator at the next plant could still catch the problem—at least in theory.

Within a month, he arrived at the massive Zhejiang Hisun plant in Taizhou, two hundred miles south of Shanghai, the site of a joint venture with Pfizer, started in 2012, to create high-quality, low-cost medicine under the umbrella of Hisun-Pfizer Pharmaceuticals. The company had seemed like a safe bet: it was China’s largest exporter of drug ingredients to the United States.

Pfizer had a formidable apparatus dedicated to maintaining quality at the two hundred plants that the company operates, or contracts with, around the world. Hundreds of people, from trained auditors to laboratory analysts, worked to safeguard the company’s drugs. Pfizer usually stations an employee in any plant where it has a stake, to ensure that its standards are met, and the Zhejiang Hisun plant was no different. Brian Johnson, formerly Pfizer’s senior director of supply chain security, acknowledged that detecting outright fraud was a challenge. But because of his confidence in Pfizer’s layered system, he didn’t view outsourcing as additionally hazardous.「If you have the appropriate controls,」he said,「I don’t think it’s adding risk.」The FDA’s investigators had been at the Zhejiang Hisun plant over a dozen times and had found little to concern them.

Baker, on arriving there, went first to the quality control laboratory. Using the rudimentary Mandarin that he learned in college, he hunted through the forest of Chinese symbols in the computer audit trails for the words「trial injection」and「experimental sample.」Despite Pfizer’s three-year head start, it took him about a day to figure out that the plant was running an alternate and hidden laboratory operation.

The plant was secretly pretesting its drug samples and then masking the results, in part by turning off audit trails to leave no evidence of the tests. In one instance, Baker found that technicians had turned off the audit trail on February 6, 2014, at 9:09 a.m., then proceeded to run eighty secret tests. The audit trail was turned back on two days later at 8:54 a.m., and the tests—now rigged and with the outcomes assured—were repeated. Baker found the telltale evidence in the software’s metadata.

By the third day of inspection, the plant managers and analysts were well aware of how devastating his inspection might be. When Baker returned from a lunch break to the quality control laboratory, he saw an analyst quickly remove a thumb drive from one of the HPLC machines and slip it into his lab coat.

Baker demanded that he hand over the thumb drive, but the man「began running and fled the laboratory premises,」he documented in his inspection report. Fifteen minutes later, a manager returned to offer him the thumb drive, but Baker had no idea whether it was the same one. He noted the incident as a refusal to share records—which was serious enough to get the plant’s drug ingredients blocked from the United States.

Baker laid out his findings in a forty-seven-page report. It was a document unlike anything the Chinese drug industry had ever seen. Word of it whipped through China’s manufacturing plants, where the prevailing attitude had long been「we can always fool a foreigner,」as one Western drug executive put it. But Baker was no ordinary foreigner. Two and a half years later, Pfizer ended its partnership with Zhejiang Hisun.

Six weeks after the Zhejian Hisun inspection, Baker went to Dalian in the Liaodong Peninsula and inspected another plant; this one, owned and operated by Pfizer, was making finished doses for the U.S. market. There, too, he found manipulated tests, unreported results, and loose batch records that showed the plant using expired materials. One stack of documents disappeared entirely during his inspection; he found them later on an upper floor, tucked inside a wooden crate.

Before long, Baker had carved a wide swath through China. At thirty-four more plants he inspected across the country, he found violations—many of them similarly devastating instances of data manipulation. Baker’s inspections cast a harsh light not just on Chinese drug manufacturing, where fraud was endemic, but also on the FDA’s foreign inspection program.「Every time he puts a foot in a company he’s finding more problems,」as one senior FDA official said of Baker.「What does that say about an inspectional force that’s not finding this?」

The FDA’s investigators had been trained for a different era, when the data printed out on paper was the only data that existed. The agency had not significantly rethought or overhauled its training program in decades. As one FDA consultant put it,「People are using brains from 1990 to do their thinking」today.

Most of the FDA’s investigators who were sent to China did not speak the language. They couldn’t read the manufacturing records. The FDA did not provide independent translators. Instead, the companies provided the translators who, more often than not, were company salesmen. Too frequently, FDA investigators simply gave plants a pass, deeming them to be No Action Indicated because they had no way to tell otherwise.

The investigators also couldn’t read street signs, which made them vulnerable to wild manipulations. Companies steered them to phony「show」plants, where everything looked compliant, but the companies weren’t manufacturing there. Sometimes a group of companies pooled their resources and invested in the same「show」factory, so that different FDA inspectors returned to the same plant at different times, each one thinking they were inspecting a different facility.

Baker often inspected alone. But when American or other global investigators worked alongside him, they also became detectives. They followed tire tracks off manufacturing sites to see where companies were taking their products. They took photographs through the windows of dilapidated plants, documenting the labels on the boxes inside, to prove that these were the actual factories where companies were doing their manufacturing. As Baker collaborated with investigators from other countries, his reputation spread around the world. At conferences, regulatory agencies from ANVISA in Brazil to the European Medicines Agency invited Baker to train their investigators.

In Baker’s view, only a critical mass of investigators who knew exactly where to look and what to look for could truly protect consumers and change the industry for good. In December 2015, at an hour-long meeting with the acting FDA commissioner, Baker proposed a program for training the FDA’s investigators to detect data fraud.

At the FDA’s headquarters in Silver Spring, Maryland, Baker’s proposal landed in a teetering system. If investigators looked too hard, if reviewers scrutinized applications too much, if the agency didn’t approve enough drugs, the entire system could topple.

Already, Peter Baker’s razor-sharp inspections had halted imports and contributed to drug shortages rippling across the country. His findings had placed a question mark over generic drug companies operating overseas. They had also slowed drug approvals. That, in turn, jeopardized FDA funding, which was based in part on how many drug applications the agency approved. Baker’s proposal—to train the FDA’s investigators to look harder and find more violations—threatened even more disruptions. Consequently, some in the agency began to target a different problem: Peter Baker himself.

Publicly, FDA officials gave every impression that they were taking the fight to companies that falsified data. As Thomas Cosgrove, the FDA’s director of compliance at the Center for Drug Evaluation and Research, told a reporter for an industry newsletter, the FDA planned to make drug companies that「shade the facts . . . increasingly uncomfortable.」They could expect additional penalties, he said. To the world, it looked like the FDA had launched a global crackdown on data fraud.

Yet Baker watched as the FDA, despite clear authority and well-written laws, chose to undercut inspections and soften investigators’ findings. From 2012 to 2018, the agency downgraded 112 inspections in India to make the final classifications less severe. For company after company—Mylan, Cipla, Aurobindo, Dr. Reddy’s, Sun Pharma, Glenmark—findings of Official Action Indicated (OAI) became Voluntary Action Indicated (VAI). These downgrades essentially nullified the judgments made by its investigators in the field and replaced them with judgments made by bureaucrats in Maryland. Cosgrove and other officials waived import restrictions. They chose to communicate confidentially with some firms through so-called untitled letters instead of issuing public reprimands. Politics seemed to guide the agency’s enforcement actions. As the former compliance officer Doug Campbell observed,「They want to weaken compliance at CDER because they want to approve applications. Compliance only messes it up.」

After Baker’s inspection at the Pfizer-affiliated Zhejiang Hisun plant, the FDA restricted the import of thirty of the plant’s drug products. But fifteen of the drug ingredients were in short supply in the United States, so the agency lifted the restriction on about half of the drugs, including a crucial chemotherapy drug for treating leukemia and breast and ovarian cancers.

To Baker, the decision made no sense. According to regulations, the drugs had no place in the U.S. supply. They weren’t good or safe enough. Shortages didn’t change that fact. Drug shortages had become a game, and the FDA was getting played. Companies committing fraud could still protect their bottom line by making drugs in short supply. Those would not be restricted, whether made with dubious methods or not, and could serve as a steady source of business, even if companies were caught making unsafe drugs.「There are no consequences for companies that are shipping substandard product,」Baker observed to a colleague.「It’s a win-lose situation—and [patients] are the losers.」

Baker left China in March 2018 and relocated to Santiago, Chile, to become the FDA’s country director there. But the FDA stopped sending him to do inspections, a factor in his resignation from the agency a year later.

In July 2018, a safety crisis rocked the global drug supply—and seemed to prove Baker’s point. Regulators in Europe announced a harrowing discovery: the widely used active ingredient for valsartan, a generic version of the blood pressure drug Diovan, contained a cancer-causing toxin known as NDMA (once used in liquid rocket fuel). The drug had been made by the Chinese company Zhejiang Huahai Pharmaceuticals, the world’s largest manufacturer of valsartan active ingredients. In the United States, over a dozen drug manufacturers, all of which used the Chinese ingredient, recalled their products, as did dozens more manufacturers around the world. The Chinese company tried to defend itself by explaining that it had altered its production process in 2012 to increase yields of the drug, a change that had been approved by regulators. In short, the change had been made to maximize profit. Some patients had been consuming the toxin for six years.

As the FDA tried to reassure consumers that the risk of developing cancer, even from daily exposure to the toxin, was extremely low, a second cancer-causing impurity was detected in the ingredients. Though the valsartan catastrophe seemed to take the FDA by surprise, it shouldn’t have. In May 2017, an FDA investigator had found evidence at the plant in Linhai, China, that the company was failing to investigate potential impurities in its own drugs, which showed up as aberrant peaks in its test results. The investigator designated the plant as Official Action Indicated, but the agency downgraded that to VAI. In short, the company was let off the hook—only to wind up in the middle of a worldwide quality scandal less than a year later.

By 2017, Baker had gotten a limited green light to hold occasional workshops for his colleagues. But even as he educated them to detect data fraud, the FDA had already taken its most significant step to undermine the inspections that might reveal it.

Under the India pilot program of short- and no-notice inspections that Altaf Lal had launched, the rate of inspections resulting in the FDA’s most serious finding, OAI, had increased by at least 50 percent. It seemed logical for the FDA to expand this model and make unannounced inspections the norm in every country in the world. But agency bureaucrats made a different decision.

On the morning of November 3, 2016, the FDA’s top officials in India gathered with senior Indian drug regulators, the Indian drug industry’s chief lobbyist, and three Indian generic drug executives including from the companies Cadila and Dr. Reddy’s, both of which had endured scorching FDA findings at their facilities. The meeting lasted an hour and was led by Dr. Mathew Thomas, who’d taken over the job of running the FDA’s India office from Altaf Lal.

The men discussed collaboration and capacity-building and the schedule of future workshops that the FDA was holding on good manufacturing practices. Dilip Shah, secretary-general of the Indian Pharmaceutical Alliance, made clear that Indian drug makers were doing their part to address quality issues, and that his trade group would release guidelines to the industry, emphasizing the importance of data reliability. Mathew Thomas then told those gathered the words they’d been waiting to hear. The experiment was over. From now on, for all routine inspections, the FDA would notify India’s companies in advance.

## Acknowledgments

Writing this book has been a journey, and many people helped along the way.

Self magazine published my first article about generic drugs in 2009, where I was lucky enough to be edited by Sara Austin, now executive editor at Real Simple. At Fortune magazine, my May 2013 article on Ranbaxy,「Dirty Medicine,」which served as the jumping-off point for this book, benefited greatly from the exceptional skill, judgment, and dedication of my editor, Nick Varchaver, now a senior editor at ProPublica.

In 2014, as I began work on this book, I needed reporting help all over the world. I am grateful to David Kaplan, the executive director of the Global Investigative Journalism Network (GIJN), who connected me with talented journalists in India, Ghana, China, and elsewhere. The GIJN conferences opened the door to an international community of brave and talented journalists, who inspired and helped me throughout this project. I am indebted to Mark Lee Hunter of Story-Based Inquiry Associates for his advice on how to turn years of reporting and mountains of information into an actual story, at a moment when I felt stuck.

At the International Consortium of Investigative Journalists (ICIJ), deputy director Marina Walker Guevara generously allowed access to the offshore banking records of the Panama and Paradise papers, while Emilia Diaz Struck patiently provided instructions on how to navigate within the records. At the Freedom of the Press Foundation, director of newsroom digital security Harlo Holmes and digital security trainer Olivia Martin offered valuable guidance on digital file encryption, risk assessment, and secure communication with sources.

Throughout my reporting, I relied on a database called FDAzilla, which captures every inspection the FDA has performed around the world, and also provides important ancillary data. As my expenses mounted and my budget tightened, the site’s cofounder Tony Chen and CEO Michael de la Torre allowed me continued use of the site, and even provided customized data. Other outside organizations also provided invaluable help. Dr. Rebecca Goldin, the director of STATS.org, helped me to translate statistical concepts into plain English. Peter Sorenson of the Sorenson Law Office and Daniel J. Stotter of Stotter and Associates LLC excel at litigating stalled Freedom of Information requests and helped me get records from the FDA.

I am also grateful to so many who hosted me along the way or shared their local knowledge during my reporting trips: Sophy Burnham, Kathy Sreedhar, Vivienne Walt, Anton Harber, and Rimjhim Dey.

I am indebted to a number of organizations whose generous support allowed me to complete my reporting. The Carnegie Corporation selected me as a 2015 Andrew Carnegie Fellow and provided significant funding. The Alfred P. Sloan Foundation provided a grant through its Public Understanding of Science, Technology, and Economics program. I am particularly grateful to Sloan’s vice president and program director Doron Weber for his faith in this project. The McGraw Center for Business Journalism at CUNY’s Craig Newmark Graduate School of Journalism provided me with a McGraw Fellowship for Business Journalism. The McGraw Center’s executive director Jane Sasseen was generous with her time and advice. A George Polk Award for Investigative Reporting also provided essential support.

Some very fine journalists worked on this book. Ariel Bleicher brought her elegant writing and sharp reporting skills to work as a research associate on the book for a year. In India, Syed Nazakat helped me to navigate the complex world of India’s business networks and government bureaucracy. Kent Mensah helped me on the ground in Ghana. Sunny Yang assisted me in China. Doris Burke and Andrew Goldberg delved into legal and financial records. Without the talent and hard work of Sony Salzman, a science journalist adept at analyzing data who worked by my side for three years, this book would not have gotten across the finish line. Kelsey Kudak fact-checked this book with remarkable skill. Any remaining errors are my own.

I am also grateful to a number of top-flight editors. Hilary Redmon, now at Penguin Random House, acquired this book for Ecco/HarperCollins, and gave vital early guidance. Domenica Alioto, a master of narrative nonfiction editing, helped to forge the book’s structure. At Ecco, I am indebted to Emma Janaskie, who skillfully edited the book and moved it into production. Additional thanks to the great team there: Daniel Halpern, Miriam Parker, Gabriella Doob, Meghan Deans, Caitlin Mulrooney-Lyski, and Rachel Meyers. I am particularly grateful to William S. Adams at HarperCollins for his sterling legal review and unflagging patience.

This book could not have happened without the unstinting wisdom, encouragement, and vision of my agent and friend, Tina Bennett. Even at the most difficult of times, her support never wavered.

I am grateful to the friends, colleagues, and family members whose close reading, consultation, and first-rate editorial comments made this book better in every way: Nick Varchaver; Jennifer Gonnerman; my brother, Matthew Dalton; Philip Friedman (who also came up with the book’s title); Sony Salzman; my mother, Elinor Fuchs; and my father, Michael O. Finkelstein, all served as early and insightful readers.

Maryam Mohit and Erik Blachford helped decipher financial records. Bryan Christy gave prescient editorial advice. Maureen N. McLane let me tap her unsurpassed wordsmithing skills. Vivian Berger, my stepmother, gave me expert advice on dispute resolution.

Thank you to my friends and family—including Lindy Friedman, Tracy Straus, and my sister, Claire Finkelstein—for their continued support during this process. My daily talks with Julia Freedson sustained me. My cherished friend Karen Avenoso (1967–1998) lives on every page.

My beloved children, Amelia and Isobel, made sure that I never lost touch with the world beyond these pages. They were patient, supportive, and funny during a project that seemed to never end. (They recommend that I write children’s books next.) My husband, Ken Levenson, helped in every way. He encouraged me at each step, took care of the family during my long reporting trips, offered wise counsel through thorny reporting and writing problems, and read many drafts.

Finally, a special thank-you to my many sources, who cared enough about the integrity of our medicine and the well-being of patients to entrust me with their information. Many of them spent hours—even years—patiently fielding my questions and helping me to understand complex processes. Without them, there would be no book.