# 参考文献

## 引言：不要浪费宝贵的时间睡觉

[1] Buxton, O. M. & S. W. Cain & S. P. O' Connoer & J. H. Potter & J. F. Duffy & W. Wang & C. A. Czeisler & S. A. Shea. Adverse metabolic consequences in humans of prolonged sleep restriction combined with circadian disruption [J].Science translational Medicine , 2012-4-11.

[2] Xie, L & H. Kang & Q. Xu & M. J. Chen & Y. Liao & M. Thiyagarajan & J. O'Donnell & D. J. Christensen & C. Nicholson & J. J. Iliff & T. Takano & R. Deane & M. Nedergaard. Sleep drives metabolite clearance from the adult brain [J]. Science , 2013-10-18.

## 1. 时钟在滴答——昼夜节律

[1] Sleep Council Great British Bedtime Report ，2013.

[2] National Sleep Foundation International Bedroom Poll ，2013.

[3] Rahman, S. A. & E. E. Flynn-Evans & D. Aeschbach & G. C. Brainard & C. A. Czeisler & S. W. Lockly. Diurnal spectral sensitivity of the acute alerting effects or light [J]. Sleep , 2014-2.

## 2. 走慢与走快——睡眠类型

[1] http://www.bioinfo.mpg.de/mctq/core_work_life/core/introduction.jsp.

[2] Roennerberg, T. & T. Kuehnle & P. P. Pramstaller & J. Ricken & M. Havel & A. Guth & M. Merrow. A marker for the end of adolescence [J]. Current Biology , 2004-12-29, 14, (24).

[3] Pesta, D. H. & S. S. Angadi & M. Burtscher & C. K. Roberts. The effects of caffeine, nicotine, ethanol, and tetrahydrocannabinol on exercise performance [J]. Nutrition and Metabolism , 2013-12.

[4] Ganio, M. S. & J. F. Klau & D. J. Casa & L. E. Armstrong & C. M. Maresh. Effect of caffeine on sport-specific endurance performance: a systematic review [J]. Journal of Strength and Conditioning Research , 2009-1.

## 3. 90 分钟睡眠法——睡眠周期

[1] Walker, M. P. & T. Brakefield & A. Morgan & J. A. Hobson & R. Stickgold. Practice with sleep makes perfect: sleep-dependent motor skill learning [J]. Neuron , 2002-7-3.

[2] Van Cauter, E. & L. Plat. Physiology of growth hormone secretion during sleep [J]. Journal of Pediatrics , 1996-5.

[3] Cai, D. J & S. A. Mednick & E. M. Harrison & J. C. Kanady & S. C. Mednick. REM, not incubation, improves creativity by priming associative networks [J]. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America , 2009-6-23.

[4] Endo, T. & C. Roth & H. P. Landolt & E. Werth & D. Aeschbach & P. Achermann & A. A. Borbély. Selective REM sleep deprivation in humans: effects on sleep and sleep EEG [J]. American Journal of Physiology , 1998(274).

## 4. 热身与舒缓——睡眠前后的例行程序

[1] Great British Survey, 2012.

[2] Walke, M. P. Sleep-dependent memory processing [J]. Harvard Review of Psychology , 2008-10.

[3] Characteristics of Home Workers [R]. Office for National Statistics, 2014.

## 5. 暂停片刻，该休息了！——日间小睡

[1] Warren, J. How to sleep like a hunter-gatherer [J]. Discover , 2007-12.

[2] Lahl, O. & C. Wispel & B. Willigens & R. Pietrowsky. An ultra short episode of sleep is sufficient to promote declarative memory performance [J] .Journal of Sleep Research , 2008-3.

[3] Rosekind, M. R. & R. M. Smith & D. L. Miller & E. L. Co & K. B. Gregory & L. L. Webbon & P. H. Gander & J. V. Lebacqz. Alertness management: strategic naps in operational settings [J]. Journal of Sleep Research , 1995-12.

[4] http://swampland.time.com/2011/04/26/memo-to-the-boss-naps-increase-performance/

[5] Brooks, A. & L. Lack. A brief afternoon nap following nocturnal sleep restriction: which nap duration is most recuperative? [J]. Sleep , 2006-6.

[6] Anders Ericsson, K. & N. Charness & P. J. Feltovich & R. R. Hoffman, The Cambridge Handbook of Expertise and Expert Performance [M]. Cambridge University Press, 2006.

[7] Sleep-related Crashes on Sections of Different Road Types in the UK (1995-2001) [R]. Department for Transport, 2004.

[8] Advanced Driver Fatigue Research [R]. Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration (FMCSA) of the US Department of Transportation (USDOT), 2007.

[9] Ericsson & et al. Cambridge Handbook of Expertise and Expert Performance.

## 7. 修复室——睡眠环境

[1] Thompson, A. & H. Jones & W. Gregson & G. Atkinson. Effects of dawn simulation on markers of sleep inertia and pose-waking performance in humans [J]. European Journal of Applied Physiology , 2014-5. Gabel, V. & M. Maire & C. F. Reichert & S. L. Chellappa & C. Schmidt & V. Hommes & A. U. Viola & C. Cajochen. Effects of artificial dawn and morning blue light on daytime cognitive performance, well-being, cortisol and melatonin levels [J]. Chronobiology International , 2013-10.

[2] Ofcom Communications Market Report [R]. 2011.

## 8. 把握先机——利用 R90 修复方案

[1] Eckel, R. H. & J. M. Jakicic & J. D. Ard & J. M. de Jesus & N. Houston Miller & V. S. Hubbard & I. M. Lee & A. H. Lichtenstein & C. M. Loria & B. E. Millen & C. A. Nornas & F. M. Sacks & S. C. Smith Jr & L. P. Svetkey & T. A. Wadden & S. Z. Yanovski. 2013 AHA/ACC guideline on lifestyle management to reduce cardiovascular risk: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines [J]. Journal of the American College of Cardiology , 2014-7-1.

[2] Cappuccio, F. P. & D. Cooper & L. D' Elia & P. Stazzullo & M. A. Miller. Sleep duration predicts cardiovascular outcomes:a systematic review and meta-analysis of prospective studies [J]. European Heart Journal , 2011-2-7.

[3] Howatson, G. & P. G. Bell & J. Tallent & B. Middleton & M. P. McHugh & J. Ellis. Effect of tart cherry juice (Prunus cerasus) on melatonin levels and enhanced sleep quality [J]. European Journal of Nutrition , 2012-12.

[4] Loprinzi, P. D. & B. J. Cardinal. Association between objectively measured physical activity and sleep [J]. Mental Health and Physical Activity , 2011-12.

## 9. 与敌同眠——各种睡眠问题

[1] Idzikowski, I. Sound Sleep: The Expert Guide to Sleeping Well [M]. Watkins Publishing, 2013.

[2] Global Market Study on Sleep Aids [R]. Persistence Market Research, 2015-7.

[3] Gunja, N. In the Zzz zone: the effects of Z-drugs on human performance and driving [J]. Journal of Medical Toxicology , 2013-6.

[4] Kripke, D. F. & R. D. Langer & L. E. Kline. Hypnotics association with mortality or cancer: a matched cohort study [J]. British Medical Journal Open , 2012-2.

[5] Huedo-Medina, T. B. & I. Kirsch & J. Middlemass & M. Klonizakis & A. N. Siriwardena. Effectiveness of non-benzodiazepine hypnotics in treatment of adult insomnia: meta-analysis of data submitted to the Food and Drug Administration [J].British Medical Journal , 2012-12.

[6] Connelly, D. Sales of over-the-counter medicines in 2015 by clinical area and top 50 selling brands [J]. Pharmaceutical Journal , 2016-3-24.

[7] McHill, A. W. & E. L. Melanson & J. Higgins & E. Connick & T. M. Moehlman & E. R. Stothard & K. P. Wright Jr. Impact of circadian misalignment on energy metabolism during simulated nightshift work [J]. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of Amerca , 2014-12-2.

[8] Gu, F. & J. Han & F. Laden & A. Pan & N. E. Caporaso & M. J. Stampfer & I. Kawachi & K. M. Rexrode & W. C. Willett & S. E. Hankinson & F. E. Speizer & E. S. Schernhammer. Total and cause-specific mortality of US nurses working rotating night shifts [J]. American Journal of Preventative Medicine, 2015-3.

[9] Omalu, B. I. & S. T. DeKosky & R. L. Minster & M. I. Kamboth & R. L. Hamiton & C. H. Wecht. Chronic traumatic encephalopathy in a National Football League player [J]. Neurosurgery , 2005-7.

## 10. 主队——性、伴侣和现代家庭

[1] Sleep Council Great British Bedtime Report [R]. 2013.

[2] Warner, S. & G. Murray & D. Meyer. Holiday and school-term sleep patterns of Australian adolescents [J]. Journal of Adolescence, 2008-10, 31(5).

[3] Harbard, E. & N. B. Allen & J. Trinder & B. Bei. What's Keeping Teenagers Up? Prebedtime Behaviors and Actigraphy-Assessed Sleep Over School and Vacation [J]. Journal of Adolescent Health, 2016-4, 58(4).





