# 参考文献

## 引言 有传染性的活液

Bos, L. 1999. Beijerinck's work on tobacco mosaic virus: Historical context and legacy. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B:Biological Sciences 354:675.

Flint, S. J. 2009. Principles of Virology . 3rd ed. Washington, DC: ASM Press.

Kay, L. E. 1986. W. M. Stanley's crystallization of the tobacco mosaic virus, 1930–1940. Isis 77:450–72.

Willner D., M. Furlan, M. Haynes, et al. 2009. Metagenomic analysis of respiratory tract DNA viral communities in cystic fibrosis and noncystic fibrosis individuals.PLoS ONE 4（10）:e7370.

## 1 并不普通的感冒

Arden, K. E., and I. M. Mackay. 2009. Human rhinoviruses: Coming in from the cold. Genome Medicine 1:44.

Briese, T., N. Renwick, M. Venter, et al. 2008. Global distribution of novel rhinovirus genotype. Emerging Infectious Diseases 14:944.

Fashner, J., K. Ericson, and S. Werner. 2012. Treatment of the common cold in children and adults. American Family Physician 86:153–59.

Palmenberg, A. C., D. Spiro, R. Kuzmickas, et al. 2009. Sequencing and analyses of all known human rhinovirus genomes reveal structure and evolution. Science 324:55–59.

## 2 祈求星星的照看

Barry, J. M. 2004. The Great Influenza: The Epic Story of the Deadliest Plague in History . New York: Viking.

Dugan, V. G., R. Chen, D. J. Spiro, et al. 2008. The evolutionary genetics and emergence of avian influenza viruses in wild birds.PLoS Pathogens 4（5）:e1000076.

Rambaut, A., O. G. Pybus, M. I. Nelson, C. Viboud, J. K. Taubenberger,and E.C. Holmes. 2008. The genomic and epidemiological dynamics of human influenza A virus.Nature 453:615–19.

Smith, G. J. D., D. Vijaykrishna, J. Bahl, et al. 2009. Origins and evolutionary genomics of the 2009 swine-origin H1N1 influenza A epidemic. Nature 459:1122–25.

Taubenberger, J. K., and D. M. Morens. 2008. The pathology of influenza virus infections. Annual Reviews of Pathology 3:499–522.

## 3 长角的兔子

Bravo, I. G., and Á. Alonso. 2006. Phylogeny and evolution of papillomaviruses based on the E1 and E2 proteins. Virus Genes 34:249–62.

Doorbar, J. 2006. Molecular biology of human papillomavirus infection and cervical cancer. Clinical Science 110:525.

García-Vallvé, S., Á. Alonso, and I. G. Bravo. 2005. Papillomaviruses:Different genes have different histories. Trends in Microbiology 13:514–21.

García-Vallvé, S., J. R. Iglesias-Rozas, Á. Alonso, and I. G. Bravo. 2006. Different papillomaviruses have different repertoires of transcription factor binding sites: Convergence and divergence in the upstream regulatory region. BMC Evolutionary Biology 6:20.

Horvath, C. A. J., G. A. V. Boulet, V. M. Renoux, P. O. Delvenne, and J.-P.J. Bogers. 2010. Mechanisms of cell entry by human papillomaviruses:An overview. Virology Journal 7:11.

Martin, D., and J. S. Gutkind. 2008. Human tumor-associated viruses and new insights into the molecular mechanisms of cancer. Oncogene 27（Suppl2）:S31–42.

Orlando, P. A., R. A. Gatenby, A. R. Giuliano, and J. S. Brown.2012. Evolutionary ecology of human papillomavirus: trade-offs,coexistence, and origins of high-risk and low-risk types. Journal of Infectious Diseases 205:272–79.

Schiffman, M., R. Herrero, R. DeSalle, et al. 2005. The carcinogenicity of human papillomavirus types reflects viral evolution.Virology 337:76–84.

Shulzhenko, N., H. Lyng, G. F. Sanson, and A. Morgun. 2014. Ménage à trois: An evolutionary interplay between human papillomavirus, a tumor, and a woman. Trends in Microbiology 22:345–53.

## 4 敌人的敌人

Adhya, S., C. R. Merril, and B. Biswas. 2014. Therapeutic and prophylactic applications of bacteriophage components in modern medicine. Cold Spring Harbor Perspectives in Medicine 4:a012518.

Brussow, H. 2005. Phage therapy: The Escherichia coli experience. Microbiology 151:2133.

Deresinski, S. 2009. Bacteriophage therapy: Exploiting smaller fleas.Clinical Infectious Diseases 48:1096–101.

Summers, W. C. 2001. Bacteriophage therapy. Annual Reviews in Microbiology 55:437–51.

## 5 感染的海洋

Angly, F. E., B. Felts, M. Breitbart, et al. 2006. The marine viromes of four oceanic regions. PLoS Biology 4 （11）:e368.

Breitbart, M. 2012. Marine viruses: Truth or dare. Annual Review of Marine Sciences 4:425–48.

Brussaard, C. P. D., S. W. Wilhelm, F. Thingstad, et al. 2008. Global-scale processes with a nanoscale drive: The role of marine viruses. ISME Journal 2:575–78.

Danovaro, R., A. Dell'Anno, C. Corinaldesi, et al. 2008. Major viral impact on the functioning of benthic deep-sea ecosystems. Nature 454:1084–87.

Desnues, C., B. Rodriguez-Brito, S. Rayhawk, et al. 2008. Biodiversity and biogeography of phages in modern stromatolites and thrombolites.Nature 452:340–43.

Keen, E.C. 2015. A century of phage research: Bacteriophages and the shaping of modern biology. Bioessays 37:6–9.

Rohwer, F., and R. Vega Thurber. 2009. Viruses manipulate the marine environment. Nature 459:207–12.

Rohwer, F., M. Youle, H. Maughan, and N. Hisakawa. 2015. Life in Our Phage World . San Diego: Wholon.

Suttle, C. A. 2007. Marine viruses—major players in the global ecosystem. Nature Reviews Microbiology 5:801–12.

Van Etten, J. L., L. C. Lane, and R. H. Meints. 1991. Viruses and viruslike particles of eukaryotic algae. Microbiology and Molecular Biology Reviews 55:586.

## 6 人体里的「寄生者」

Blikstad, V., F. Benachenhou, G. O. Sperber, and J. Blomberg. 2008.Evolution of human endogenous retroviral sequences: A conceptual account. Cellular and Molecular Life Sciences 65:3348–65.

Dewannieux, M., F. Harper, A. Richaud, et al. 2006. Identification of an infectious progenitor for the multiple-copy HERV-K human endogenous retroelements. Genome Research 16:1548–56.

Jern, P., and J. M. Coffin. 2008. Effects of retroviruses on host genome function. Annual Review of Genetics 42:709–32.

Lavialle, C., G. Cornelis, A. Dupressoir, et al. 2013. Paleovirology of「syncytins,」retroviral env genes exapted for a role in placentation.Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences 368:20120507.

Lee, A., A. Nolan, J. Watson, and M. Tristem. 2013. Identification of an ancient endogenous retrovirus, predating the divergence of the placental mammals. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B:Biological Sciences 368:20120503.

Ruprecht, K., J. Mayer, M. Sauter, K. Roemer, and N. Mueller-Lantzsch.2008. Endogenous retroviruses and cancer. Cellular and Molecular Life Sciences 65:3366–82.

Tarlinton, R., J. Meers, and P. Young. 2008. Biology and evolution of the endogenous koala retrovirus. Cellular and Molecular Life Sciences 65:3413–21.

Weiss, R. A. 2006. The discovery of endogenous retroviruses. Retrovirology 3:67.

Weiss, R. A. 2013. On the concept and elucidation of endogenous retroviruses. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences 368:20120494.

## 7 新的灾难

D'arca, M., A. Ayoubaa, A. Estebana, et al. 2015. Origin of the HIV-1 group O epidemic in western lowland gorillas. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences Published ahead of print, March 2, 2015.doi:10.1073/pnas.1502022112.

Fan, H. 2011. AIDS: Science and Society . 6th ed. Sudbury, MA: Jones and Bartlett.

Faria, N. R., A. Rambaut, M. A. Suchard, et al. 2014. The early spread and epidemic ignition of HIV-1 in human populations. Science 346:56–61.

Fauci, A. S., and H. D. Marston. 2014. Ending AIDS–is an HIV vaccine necessary? New England Journal of Medicine 370:495–98.

Gilbert, M. T. P., A. Rambaut, G. Wlasiuk, T. J. Spira, A. E. Pitchenik,and M. Worobey. 2007. The emergence of HIV/AIDS in the Americas and beyond. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 104:18566.

Keele, B. F. 2006. Chimpanzee reservoirs of pandemic and nonpandemic HIV-1. Science 313:523–26.

Montagnier, L. 2010. 25 Years after HIV discovery: Prospects for cure and vaccine. Virology 397:248–54.

Worobey, M., M. Gemmel, D. E. Teuwen, et al. 2008. Direct evidence of extensive diversity of HIV-1 in Kinshasa by 1960. Nature 455:661–64.

## 8 融入美国

Brault, A. C. 2009. Changing patterns of West Nile virus transmission:Altered vector competence and host susceptibility. Veterinary Research 40:43.

Diamond, M. S. 2009. Progress on the development of therapeutics against West Nile virus. Antiviral Research 83:214–27.

Gould, E. A., and S. Higgs. 2009. Impact of climate change and other factors on emerging arbovirus diseases. Transactions of the Royal Society of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene 103:109–21.

Hamer, G. L, U. D. Kitron, T. L. Goldberg, et al. 2009. Host selection by Culex pipiens mosquitoes and West Nile virus amplification.American Journal of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene 80:268.

Sfakianos, J. N. 2009. West Nile Virus . 2nd ed. New York: Chelsea House.

Venkatesan M., and J. L. Rasgon. 2010. Population genetic data suggest a role for mosquito-mediated dispersal of West Nile virus across the western United States. Molecular Ecology 19:1573–84.

## 9 预测下一场瘟疫

Holmes, E. C., and A. Rambaut. 2004. Viral evolution and the emergence of SARS coronavirus. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences 359:1059–65.

Parrish, C. R., E. C. Holmes, D. M. Morens, et al. 2008. Cross-species virus transmission and the emergence of new epidemic diseases. Microbiology and Molecular Biology Reviews 72:457–70.

Pigott, D. M., N. Golding, A. Mylne, et al. 2014. Mapping the zoonotic niche of Ebola virus disease in Africa. Elife 3:e04395.

Piot, P. 2013. No Time to Lose: A Life in Pursuit of Deadly Viruses . New York: W. W. Norton.

Quammen, D. 2012. Spillover: Animal Infections and the Next Human Pandemic . New York: W. W. Norton.

Raj, V. S., A. D. Osterhaus, R. A. Fouchier, and B. L. Haagmans. 2014.MERS: Emergence of a novel human coronavirus. Current Opinion in Virology 5:58–62.

Sack, K., S. Fink, P. Belluck, and A. Nossiter. 2014. Ebola's deadline escape. New York Times , December 30, 2014, D1.

Skowronski, D. M., C. Astell, R. C. Brunham, et al. 2005. Severe acute respiratory syndrome （SARS）: A year in review. Annual Review of Medicine 56:357–81.

WHO Ebola Response Team. 2014. Ebola virus disease in West Africa—the first 9 months of the epidemic and forward projections.New England Journal of Medicine 371:1481–95.

Wolfe, N. 2009. Preventing the next pandemic. Scientific America , April 2009, 76–81.

## 10 漫长的告别

Damon, I. K., C. R. Damaso, and G. McFadden. 2014. Are we there yet?The smallpox research agenda using variola virus. PLoS Pathogens 10:e1004108.

Dormitzer, P. R., P. Suphaphiphat, D. G. Gibson, et al. 2013. Synthetic generation of influenza vaccine viruses for rapid response to pandemics. Science Translational Medicine 5:185ra68.

Hughes, A. L., S. Irausquin, and R. Friedman. 2010. The evolutionary biology of poxviruses. Infection, Genetics and Evolution 10:50–59.

Jacobs, B. L., J. O. Langland, K. V. Kibler, et al. 2009. Vaccinia virus vaccines: Past, present and future. Antiviral Research 84:1–13.

Kennedy, R. B., I. Ovsyannikova, and G. A. Poland. 2009. Smallpox vaccines for biodefense. Vaccine 27 （Suppl）:D73–79.

Koplow, D. A. 2003. Smallpox: The Fight to Eradicate a Global Scourge .Berkeley: University of California Press.

Kosuri, S., and G. M. Church. 2014. Large-scale de novo DNA synthesis:Technologies and applications. Nature Methods 11:499–507.

Mariner, J. C., J. A. House, C. A. Mebus, et al. 2012. Rinderpest eradication: Appropriate technology and social innovations. Science 337:1309–12.

Reardon, S. 2014.「Forgotten」NIH smallpox virus languishes on death row. Nature 514:544.

Shchelkunov, S. N. 2009. How long ago did smallpox virus emerge? Archives of Virology 154:1865–71.

Wimmer, E. 2006. The test-tube synthesis of a chemical called poliovirus.EMBO Reports 7:S3–9.

## 尾声 冷却塔中的「外来客」

Abrahão, J. S., F. P. Dornas, L. C. F. Silva, et al 2014. Acanthamoeba polyphaga mimivirus and other giant viruses: an open field to outstanding discoveries. Virology Journal 11:120.

Claverie, J. M., and C. Abergel. 2013. Open questions about giant viruses.Advances in Virus Research 85:25-56.

Forterre, P. 2010. Defining life: The virus viewpoint.Origins of Life and Evolution of Biospheres 40:151–60.

Forterre, P., M. Krupovic, and D. Prangishvili. 2014. Cellular domains and viral lineages. Trends in Microbiology 22:554–58.

Katzourakis, A., and A. Aswad. 2014. The origins of giant viruses,virophages and their relatives in host genomes. BMC Biology 12:51.

Koonin, E. V., and V. V. Dolja. 2014. Virus world as an evolutionary network of viruses and capsidless selfish elements.Microbiology and Molecular Biology Reviews 78:278–303.

Moreira, D., and C. Brochier-Armanet. 2008. Giant viruses, giant chimeras: The multiple evolutionary histories of mimivirus genes.BMC Evolutionary Biology 8:12.

Moreira, D., and P. Lopez-Garcia. 2009. Ten reasons to exclude viruses from the tree of life. Nature Reviews Microbiology 7:306–11.

Ogata, H., and J. M. Claverie. 2008. How to infect a mimivirus. Science 321:1305.

Raoult, D., and P. Forterre. 2008. Redefining viruses: Lessons from mimivirus. Nature Reviews Microbiology 6:315–19.

Raoult, D., B. La Scola, and R. Birtles. 2007. The discovery and characterization of mimivirus, the largest known virus and putative pneumonia agent. Clinical Infectious Diseases 45:95–102.
