我们赋予认知活动的价值，不应该仅仅被归纳为相关的体验。这些价值，有一部分理应属于活动自身，特别是对一阶欲望进行的强评估，以及对模因的自我批判式评价。或许，寻找意义的重新定向 —— 远离意识和内部感受（感受性），朝向使我们在这个世界上成为自主和独特个体的评估活动 —— 将使我们受益匪浅。当我们从事下列活动时，其实就是在创造意义：努力执行二阶评估；努力实现我们偏好层级中的理性整合；尝试实现我们不同一阶偏好的一致；对于我们生活中的符号意义表现出警觉；看重作为载体的我们具有的价值，而不是让自发式系统中的遗传倾向在一个变化中的技术环境里牺牲我们的利益。所有这些活动都界定了人类的独特性：他们获得了对自己生活的控制，以一种地球生命行为中的独特方式 —— 理性的自我决定。

本书由「行行」整理，如果你不知道读什么书或者想获得更多免费电子书请加小编微信或 QQ：2338856113 小编也和结交一些喜欢读书的朋友 或者关注小编个人微信公众号名称：幸福的味道 id：d716-716 为了方便书友朋友找书和看书，小编自己做了一个电子书下载网站，网站的名称为：周读 网址：http://www.ireadweek.com

[1] 意识的不同层面已经在不同文献中讨论过多次 —e.g.，Atkinson，Thomas，and Cleeremans，2000；Block 1995；Carruthers 2000；P. S. Churchland 2002；Flanagan 1992；Rosenthal 1986；Wegner and Wheatley 1999；Wilkes 1988. 关于意识通达，见 Baars 1997，2002；Damasio 1999；Dehaene and Naccache 2001；Dennett 2001；Nozick 2001；and Pinker 1997。

[2] 见第 4 章和其他一系列研究项目 —e.g.，Ainslie 2001；Gigerenzer and Todd 1999；Gilovich，Griffin，and Kahneman 2002；Goel and Dolan 2003；Hastie and Dawes 2001；Hogarth 2001；Kahneman and Tversky 2000；Stanovich 1999；Todd and Gigerenzer 2000。

[3] 见 Flanagan 2002；Millgram 1997；Nathanson 1994；Nozick 1993；Rawls 2001；and Scanlon 1998。

[4] 很多实证和哲学文献都讨论过心理状态的表征，见 Carruthers 1998，2002；Clark 2001；Clark and Karmiloff-Smith 1993；Dienes and Perner 1999；Evans and Over 1999；Leslie 2000；Lillard 2001；Perner 1991，1998；Sperber 2000b；Sterelny 2001b；Tomasello 1999；Wellman 1990；Whiten 2001；Zelazo，Astington，and Olson 1999。

[5] 关于因果链可能存在另一种方向的观点，见 Baumeister，Boden，and Smart 1996；Dawes 1994；Kahne 1996；Ruggiero 2000；and Stout 2000。

中英人名对照表 [1]

[1] 本部分可在华章网站 www.hzbook.com 上查阅。

参考文献

Abelson, R. P. 1996. The secret existence of expressive behavior. In The rational choicecontroversy, ed. J. Friedman, 25–36. New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press.

Ackerman, P., P. Kyllonen, and R. Richards, eds. 1999. Learning and individual differences:Process, trait, and content determinants. Washington, D.C.: American PsychologicalAssociation.

Adams, M. J. 1989. Thinking skills curricula: Their promise and progress. EducationalPsychologist 24:25–77.

Adams, M. J., and C. E. Feehrer. 1991. Thinking and decision making. In Teaching decisionmaking to adolescents, ed. J. Baron and R. V. Brown, 79–94. Hillsdale, N.J.:Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.

Adler, J. E. 1984. Abstraction is uncooperative. Journal for the Theory of Social Behaviour14:165–81.

———. 1991. An optimist’s pessimism: Conversation and conjunctions. In Probabilityand rationality: Studies on L. Jonathan Cohen’s philosophy of science, ed. E. Eells andT. Maruszewski, 251–82.

Amsterdam: Editions Rodopi.

Ahluwalia, R., and Z. Gurhan-Canli. 2000. The effects of extensions on the family brandname: An accessibility-diagnosticity perspective. Journal of Consumer Research27:371–81.

Ainslie, G. 1982. A behavioral economic approach to the defence mechanisms: Freud’senergy theory revisited. Social Science Information 21:735–80.

———. 1984. Behavioral economics II: Motivated involuntary behavior. Social ScienceInformation 23:247–74.

———. 1992. Picoeconomics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

———. 2001. Breakdown of will. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Allais, M. 1953. Le comportement de l’homme rationnel devant le risque: Critique despostulats et axioms de l’scole americaine. Econometrica 21:503–46.

Allan, L. G. 1980. A note on measurement of contingency between two binary variablesin judgment tasks. Bulletin of the Psychonomic Society 15:147–49.

Alloy, L. B., and N. Tabachnik. 1984. Assessment of covariation by humans and animals:The joint influence of prior expectations and current situational information.

Psychological Review 91:112–49.

Anderson, E. 1993. Value in ethics and economics. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard UniversityPress.

Anderson, J. R. 1983. The architecture of cognition. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard UniversityPress.

———. 1990. The adaptive character of thought. Hillsdale, N.J.: Lawrence ErlbaumAssociates.

———. 1991. Is human cognition adaptive? Behavioral and Brain Sciences 14:471–517.

Anderson, J. R., L. M. Reder, and H. A. Simon. 1996. Situated learning and education.

Educational Researcher 25, no. 4: 5–11.

Anderson, M. 1992. Intelligence and development: A cognitive theory. Oxford: Blackwell.

———. 1998. Mental retardation, general intelligence, and modularity. Learning andIndividual Differences 10:159–78.

Arkes, H. R., and P. Ayton. 1999. The sunk cost and Concorde effects: Are humans lessrational than lower animals? Psychological Bulletin 125:591–600.

Arkes, H. R., and A. R. Harkness. 1983. Estimates of contingency between two dichotomousvariables. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General 112:117–35.

Atance, C. M., and D. K. O’Neill. 2001. Episodic future thinking. Trends in CognitiveSciences 5:533–39.

Atkinson, A. P., M. Thomas, and A. Cleeremans. 2000. Consciousness: Mapping the theoreticallandscape. Trends in Cognitive Sciences 4:372–82.

Atran, S. 1998. Folk biology and the anthropology of science: Cognitive universals andcultural particulars. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 21:547–609.

Audi, R. 1993a. Action, intention, and reason. Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press.

———. 1993b. The structure of justification. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

———. 2001. The architecture of reason: The structure and substance of rationality. Oxford:Oxford University Press.

Aunger, R. 2000a. Darwinizing culture: The status of memetics as a science. Oxford: OxfordUniversity Press.

———. 2000b. Introduction. In Darwinizing culture: The status of memetics as a science, ed.

R. Aunger, 1–23. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

———. 2002. The electric meme: A new theory of how we think. New York: Free Press.

Austin, E. J., and I. J. Deary. 2002. Personality dispositions. In Why smart people can be sostupid, ed. R. J. Sternberg, 187–211. New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press.

Baars, B. J. 1997. In the theater of consciousness: The workspace of the mind. Oxford: OxfordUniversity Press.

———. 2002. The cognitive access hypothesis: Origins and recent evidence. Trends inCognitive Sciences 6:47–52.

Babad, E., and Y. Katz. 1991. Wishful thinking—Against all odds. Journal of AppliedSocial Psychology 21:1921–38.

Badcock, C. 2000. Evolutionary psychology: A critical introduction. Cambridge, England:

Polity Press.

Baddeley, A. 1996. Exploring the central executive. Quarterly Journal of ExperimentalPsychology 49A:5–28.

Baddeley, A., D. Chincotta, and A. Adlam. 2001. Working memory and the control ofaction: Evidence from task switching. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General130:641–57.

Baldwin, D. A. 2000. Interpersonal understanding fuels knowledge acquisition. CurrentDirections in Psychological Science 9:40–45.

Ball, J. A. 1984. Memes as replicators. Ethology and Sociobiology 5:145–61.

Baltes, P. B. 1987. Theoretical propositions of life-span developmental psychology: Onthe dynamics between growth and decline. Developmental Psychology 23:611–26.

Barash, D. 2001. Revolutionary biology: The new gene-centered view of life. New Brunswick,N.J.: Transaction.

Bargh, J. A., and T. L. Chartrand. 1999. The unbearable automaticity of being. AmericanPsychologist 54: 462–79.

Bar-Hillel, M., and D. Budescu. 1995. The elusive wishful thinking effect. Thinking andReasoning 1:71–103.

Barkley, R. A. 1998. Behavioral inhibition, sustained attention, and executive functions:

Constructing a unifying theory of ADHD. Psychological Bulletin 121:65–94.

Barkow, J. H. 1989. Darwin, sex, and status: Biological approaches to mind and culture.

Toronto: University of Toronto Press.

Barkow, J., L. Cosmides, and J. Tooby, eds. 1992. The adapted mind. New York: OxfordUniversity Press.

Baron, J. 1985. Rationality and intelligence. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

———. 1993. Morality and rational choice. Dordrecht: Kluwer.

———. 1998. Judgment misguided: Intuition and error in public decision making. New York:Oxford University Press.

———. 1999. Utility maximization as a solution: Promise, difficulties, and impediments.

American Behavioral Scientist 42:1301–21.

———. 2000. Thinking and deciding. 3d ed. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Baron, J., and R. V. Brown, eds. 1991. Teaching decision making to adolescents. Hillsdale,N.J.: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.

Baron, J., and S. Leshner. 2000. How serious are expressions of protected values? Journalof Experimental Psychology: Applied 6:183–94.

Baron, J., and M. Spranca. 1997. Protected values. Organizational Behavior and HumanDecision Processes 70:1–16.

Baron-Cohen, S. 1995. Mindblindness: An essay on autism and theory of mind. Cambridge,Mass.: MIT Press.

———. 1998. Does the study of autism justify minimalist innate modularity? Learningand Individual Differences 10:179–92.

Baron-Cohen, S., H. Tager-Flusberg, and D. J. Cohen, eds. 2000. Palaeoanthropologicalperspectives on the theory of mind. Understanding other minds: Perspectives fromdevelopmental cognitive

neuroscience. 2d ed. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Barrett, L., R. Dunbar, and J. Lycett, J. 2002. Human evolutionary psychology. Princeton,N.J.: Princeton University Press.

Barton, R. A., and R. Dunbar. 1997. Evolution of the social brain. In Machiavellian intelligenceII: Extensions and evaluations, ed. A. Whiten and R. W. Byrne, 240–63.

Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Baumeister, R. F., J. M. Boden, and L. Smart. 1996. Relation of threatened egotism toviolence and aggression: The dark side of high self-esteem. Psychological Review103:5–33.

Bazerman, M. 1999. Smart money decisions. New York: Wiley.

———. 2001. Consumer research for consumers. Journal of Consumer Research 27:499–504.

Bazerman, M., J. Baron, and K. Shonk. 2001.「You can’t enlarge the pie」: Six barriers toeffective government. New York: Basic Books.

Bazerman, M., A. Tenbrunsel, and K. Wade-Benzoni. 1998. Negotiating with yourselfand losing: Understanding and managing conflicting internal preferences. Academyof Management Review 23:225–41.

Beach, L. R. 1990. Image theory: Decision making in personal and organizational contexts.

Chichester, England: Wiley.

Bechara, A., A. R. Damasio, H. Damasio, and S. Anderson. 1994. Insensitivity to futureconsequences following damage to human prefrontal cortex. Cognition 50:7–15.

Bechara, A., H. Damasio, D. Tranel, and A. R. Damasio. 1997. Deciding advantageouslybefore knowing the advantageous strategy. Science 275 (Feb. 26): 1293–95.

Bechara, A., D. Tranel, and H. Damasio. 2000. Characterization of the decision-makingdeficit of patients with ventromedial prefrontal cortex lesions. Brain 123:2189–2202.

Bell, D. E. 1982. Regret in decision making under uncertainty. Operations Research30:961–81.

Belsky, G., and T. Gilovich. 1999. Why smart people make big money mistakes—And how tocorrect them: Lessons from the new science of behavioral economics. New York: Simonand Schuster.

Bennett, J. 1974. The conscience of Huckleberry Finn. Philosophy 49:123–34.

Bereiter, C. 1997. Situated cognition and how to overcome it. In Situated cognition:Social, semiotic, and psychological perspectives, ed. D. Kirshner and J. A. Whitson, 3–12.

Mahwah, N.J.: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.

———. 2002. Education and mind in the knowledge age. Mahwah, N.J.: Lawrence ErlbaumAssociates.

Beyth-Marom, R., B. Fischhoff, M. Quadrel, and L. Furby. 1991. Teaching decisionmaking to adolescents: A critical review. In Teaching decision making to adolescents,ed. J. Baron and R. V. Brown, 19–59. Hillsdale, N.J.: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.

Bickerton, D. 1995. Language and human behavior. Seattle: University of WashingtonPress.

Birnbaum, M. H. 1983. Base rates in Bayesian inference: Signal detection analysis of thecab problem. American Journal of Psychology 96:85–94.

Bjorklund, D. F., and A. D. Pellegrini. 2000. Child development and evolutionary psychology.

Child Development 71:1687–1708.

———. 2002. The origins of human nature: Evolutionary developmental psychology.

Washington D.C.: American Psychological Association.

Blackmore, S. 1999. The meme machine. New York: Oxford University Press.

———. 2000a. The memes’ eye view. In Darwinizing culture: The status of memetics as ascience, ed. R. Aunger, 25–42. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

———. 2000b. The power of memes. Scientific American 283, no. 4 (October): 64–73.

Block, N. 1995. On a confusion about a function of consciousness. Behavioral and BrainSciences 18:227–87.

Bogdan, R. J. 2000. Minding minds: Evolving a reflexive mind by interpreting others.

Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.

Borges, B., D. G. Goldstein, A. Ortmann, and G. Gigerenzer. 1999. Can ignorance beatthe stock market? In Simple heuristics that make us smart, ed. G. Gigerenzer and P. M.

Todd, 59–72. New York: Oxford University Press.

Boyd, R., P. Gasper, and J. D. Trout, eds. 1991. The philosophy of science. Cambridge,Mass.: MIT Press.

Boyd, R., and P. J. Richerson. 2000. Memes: Universal acid or a better mousetrap? InDarwinizing culture: The status of memetics as a science, ed. R. Aunger, 143–62. Oxford:Oxford University Press.

Boyer, P. 1994. The naturalness of religious ideas: A cognitive theory of religion. Berkeley andLos Angeles: University of California Press.

———. 2001. Religion explained: The evolutionary origins of religious thought. New York:Basic Books.

Braid, M. 2001.「All I have to do is believe.」Independent Magazine (London). October 6,10–17.

Brainerd, C. J., and V. F. Reyna. 2001. Fuzzy-trace theory: Dual processes in memory,reasoning, and cognitive neuroscience. In Advances in child development and behavior,vol. 28, ed. H. W. Reese

and R. Kail, 41–100. San Diego: Academic Press.

Brase, G. L., L. Cosmides, and J. Tooby. 1998. Individuation, counting, and statistical inference:The role of frequency and whole-object representations in judgment underuncertainty. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General 127:3–21.

Bratman, M. E. 1987. Intention, plans, and practical reason. Cambridge, Mass.: HarvardUniversity Press.

Bratman, M. E., D. J. Israel, and M. E. Pollack. 1991. Plans and resource-bounded practicalreasoning. In Philosophy and AI: Essays at the interface, ed. J. Cummins andJ. Pollock, 7–22. Cambridge,Mass.: MIT Press.

Brauer, M., W. Wasel, and P. Niedenthal. 2000. Implicit and explicit components ofprejudice. Review of General Psychology 4:79–101.

Brenner, L. A., D. J. Koehler, V. Liberman, and A. Tversky. 1996. Overconfidence in probabilityand frequency judgments: A critical examination. Organizational Behavior andHuman Decision Processes 65:212–19.

Brewer, N. T., and G. Chapman. 2002. The fragile basic anchoring effect. Journal ofBehavioral Decision Making 15:65–77.

Brink, D. 1993. The separateness of persons, distributive norms, and moral theory. InValue, welfare, and morality, ed. R. G. Frey and C. W. Morris, 252–89. Cambridge:Cambridge University Press.

Brody, N. 1997. Intelligence, schooling, and society. American Psychologist 52:1046–50.

Bronfenbrenner, U., P. McClelland, E. Wethington, P. Moen, and S. J. Ceci. 1996. Thestate of Americans. New York: Free Press.

Broome, J. 1990. Should a rational agent maximize expected utility? In The limits of rationality,ed. K. S. Cook and M. Levi, 132–45. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

———. 1991. Weighing goods: Equality, uncertainty, and time. Oxford: Blackwell.

Brothers, L. 1990. The social brain: A project for integrating primate behaviour andneuropsychology in a new domain. Concepts in Neuroscience 1:27–51.

Brown, H. I. 1977. Perception, theory and commitment: The new philosophy of science.

Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Bugental, D. B. 2000. Acquisitions of the algorithms of social life: A domain-based approach.

Psychological Bulletin 126:187–219.

Buss, D. M. 1989. Sex differences in human mate preferences: Evolutionary hypothesestested in 37 cultures. Behavioural and Brain Sciences 12:1–49.

———. 1999. Evolutionary psychology: The new science of the mind. Boston: Allyn and Bacon.

———. 2000. The evolution of happiness. American Psychologist 55:15–23.

Buss, D. M., M. G. Haselton, T. Shackelford, A. Beske, and J. Wakefield. 1998.

Adaptations, exaptations, and spandrels. American Psychologist 53:533–48.

Byrne, R. W., and A. Whiten, eds. 1988. Machiavellian intelligence: Social expertise and theevolution of intellect in monkeys, apes, and humans. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Cacioppo, J. T., and G. G. Berntson. 1999. The affect system: Architecture and operatingcharacteristics. Current Directions in Psychological Science 8:133–37.

Cacioppo, J. T., R. E. Petty, J. Feinstein, and W. Jarvis. 1996. Dispositional differences incognitive motivation: The life and times of individuals varying in need for cognition.

Psychological Bulletin 119:197–253.

Cahan, S., and L. Artman. 1997. Is everyday experience dysfunctional for the developmentof conditional reasoning? Cognitive Development 12:261–79.

Cairns-Smith, A. G. 1996. Evolving the mind: On the nature of matter and the origin of consciousness.

Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Calvin, W. 1990. The cerebral symphony. New York: Bantam.

Camerer, C. 1995. Individual decision making. In The handbook of experimental economics,ed. J. H. Kagel and A. E. Roth, 587–703. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.

Caporael, L. R. 1997. The evolution of truly social cognition: The core configurationsmodel. Personality and Social Psychology Review 1:276–98.

Carey, S. 1985. Conceptual change in childhood. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.

Carpenter, P. A., M. A. Just, and P. Shell. 1990. What one intelligence test measures:

A theoretical account of the processing in the Raven Progressive Matrices Test.

Psychological Review 97:404–31.

Carr, T. H. 1992. Automaticity and cognitive anatomy: Is word recognition「automatic」?

American Journal of Psychology 105:201–37.

Carroll, J. B. 1993. Human cognitive abilities: A survey of factor-analytic studies. Cambridge:

Cambridge University Press.

———. 1997. Psychometrics, intelligence, and public perception. Intelligence 24:25–52.

Carruthers, P. 1998. Thinking in language? Evolution and a modularist possibility. InLanguage and thought: Interdisciplinary themes, ed. P. Carruthers and J. Boucher,94–119. Cambridge: Cambridge

University Press.

———. 2000. The evolution of consciousness. In Evolution and the human mind: Modularity,language and meta-cognition, ed. P. Carruthers and A. Chamberlain, 254–75.

Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

———. 2002. The cognitive functions of language. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 25:657–726.

Carruthers, P., and A. Chamberlain, eds. 2000. Evolution and the human mind: Modularity,language and meta-cognition. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Cartwright, J. 2000. Evolution and human behavior. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.

Case, R. 1992. The role of the frontal lobes in the regulation of cognitive development.

Brain and Cognition 20:51–73.

Cavalli-Sforza, L. L., and M. W. Feldman. 1981. Cultural transmission and evolution: Aquantitative approach. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.

Chaiken, S., A. Liberman, and A. H. Eagly. 1989. Heuristic and systematic informationwithin and beyond the persuasion context. In Unintended thought, ed. J. S. Ulemanand J. A. Bargh, 212–52. New York: Guilford Press.

Chalmers, D. J. 1996. The conscious mind: In search of a fundamental theory. Oxford:Oxford University Press.

Chapman, M. 1993. Everyday reasoning and the revision of belief. In Mechanisms ofeveryday cognition, ed. J. M. Puckett and H. W. Reese, 95–113. Hillsdale, N.J.:>Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.

Cheesman, J., and P. M. Merikle. 1984. Priming with and without awareness. Perceptionand Psychophysics 36:387–95.

———. 1986. Distinguishing conscious from unconscious perceptual processes.

Canadian Journal of Psychology 40:343–67.

Cheng, P. W., and K. J. Holyoak. 1989. On the natural selection of reasoning theories.

Cognition 33:285–313.

Cherniak, C. 1986. Minimal rationality. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.

Churchland, P. M. 1989. A neurocomputational perspective: The nature of mind and the structureof science. Cambridge: MIT Press.

———. 1995. The engine of reason, the seat of the soul. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.

Churchland, P. M., and P. S. Churchland. 1998. On the contrary: Critical essays, 1987–1997. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.

Churchland, P. S. 1986. Neurophilosophy: Toward a unified science of the mind/brain.

Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.

———. 2002. Brain-wise: Studies in neurophilosophy. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.

Clark, A. 1996. Connectionism, moral cognition, and collaborative problem solving. InMind and morals, ed. A. May, M. Friedman, and A. Clark, 109–27. Cambridge, Mass.:MIT Press.

———. 1997. Being there: Putting brain, body, and world together again. Cambridge, Mass.:MIT Press.

———. 2001. Mindware: An introduction to the philosophy of cognitive science. New York:Oxford University Press.

Clark, A., and A. Karmiloff-Smith. 1993. The cognizer’s innards: A psychological andphilosophical perspective on the development of thought. Mind and Language8:487–519.

Code, L. 1987. Epistemic responsibility. Hanover, N.H.: University Press of New England.

Cohen, L. J. 1981. Can human irrationality be experimentally demonstrated? Behavioraland Brain Sciences 4:317–70.

———. 1983. The controversy about irrationality. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 6:510–17.

———. 1986. The dialogue of reason. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Consumer Reports. 1998. Buying or leasing a car. Vol. 63, no. 4 (April): 16–22.

Colman, A. M. 1995. Game theory and its applications. Oxford: Butterworth-Heinemann.

Coltheart, M. 1999. Modularity and cognition. Trends in Cognitive Sciences 3:115–20.

Coltheart, M., and M. Davies, eds. 2000. Pathologies of belief. Oxford: Blackwell.

Connolly, T., H. R. Arkes, and K. R. Hammond, eds. 2000. Judgment and decision making:

An interdisciplinary reader. 2d ed. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Cooper, W. S. 1989. How evolutionary biology challenges the classical theory ofrational choice. Biology and Philosophy 4:457–81.

Cosmides, L. 1989. The logic of social exchange: Has natural selection shaped howhumans reason? Studies with the Wason selection task. Cognition 31:187–276.

Cosmides, L., and J. Tooby. 1992. Cognitive adaptations for social exchange. In Theadapted mind, ed. J. Barkow, L. Cosmides, and J. Tooby, 163–205. New York: OxfordUniversity Press.

———. 1994a. Better than rational: Evolutionary psychology and the invisible hand.

American Economic Review 84:327–32.

———. 1994b. Beyond intuition and instinct blindness: Toward an evolutionarily rigorouscognitive science. Cognition 50:41–77.

———. 1996. Are humans good intuitive statisticians after all? Rethinking some conclusionsfrom the literature on judgment under uncertainty. Cognition 58:1–73.

———. 2000a. Consider the source: The evolution of adaptations for decoupling andmetarepresentation. In Metarepresentations: A multidisciplinary perspective, ed.

D. Sperber, 53–115. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

———. 2000b. Evolutionary psychology and the emotions. In Handbook of emotions, 2ded., ed. M. Lewis and J. M. Haviland-Jones, 91–115. New York: Guilford Press.

Crick, F. 1994. The astonishing hypothesis. New York: Simon and Schuster.

Cronin, H. 1991. The ant and the peacock. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Cummins, D. D. 1996. Evidence for the innateness of deontic reasoning. Mind andLanguage 11:160–90.

———. 2002. The evolutionary roots of intelligence and rationality. In Common sense,reasoning, and rationality, ed. R. Elio, 132–47. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Currie, G., and I. Ravenscroft. 2002. Recreative minds. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Cziko, G. 1995. Without miracles: Universal selection theory and the second Darwinian revolution.

Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.

Daly, M., and M. Wilson. 1983. Sex, evolution, and behavior. 2d ed. Belmont, Calif.:Wadsworth.

Damasio, A. R. 1994. Descartes’ error. New York: Putnam.

———. 1999. The feeling of what happens. New York: Harcourt Brace.

D’Andrade, R. 1987. A folk model of the mind. In Cultural models in language and thought,ed. D. Holland and N. Quinn, 112–48. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Davenport, T., and J. Beck. 2001. The attention economy. Cambridge, Mass.: HarvardBusiness School Press.

Davies, M., and M. Coltheart. 2000. Introduction: Pathologies of belief. In Pathologies ofbelief, ed. M. Coltheart and M. Davies, 1–46. Oxford: Blackwell.

Davies, M., and T. Stone, eds. 1995a. Folk psychology. Oxford: Blackwell.

———, eds. 1995b. Mental simulation. Oxford: Blackwell.

Davis, D., and C. Holt. 1993. Experimental economics. Princeton, N.J.: PrincetonUniversity Press.

Dawes, R. M. 1983. Is irrationality systematic? Behavioral and Brain Sciences 6:491–92.

———. 1988. Rational choice in an uncertain world. San Diego, Calif.: Harcourt BraceJovanovich.

———. 1989. Statistical criteria for establishing a truly false consensus effect. Journal ofExperimental Social Psychology 25:1–17.

———. 1990. The potential nonfalsity of the false consensus effect. In Insights into decisionmaking, ed. R. M. Hogarth, 179–99. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

———. 1994. House of cards: Psychology and psychotherapy based on myth. New York:Free Press.

———. 1998. Behavioral decision making and judgment. In The handbook of socialpsychology, ed. D. T. Gilbert, S. T. Fiske, and G. Lindzey, 1:497–548. Boston:McGraw-Hill.

———. 2001. Everyday irrationality. Boulder, Colo.: Westview Press.

Dawkins, R. 1976. The selfish gene. New ed., 1989. New York: Oxford University Press.

———. 1982. The extended phenotype. New York: Oxford University Press.

———. 1983. Universal Darwinism. In Evolution from molecules to men, ed. D. S. Bendall,403–25. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

———. 1986. The blind watchmaker. New York: Norton.

———. 1993. Viruses of the mind. In Dennett and his critics, ed. B. Dahlbom, 13–27.

Cambridge, Mass.: Blackwell.

———. 1995. Putting away childish things. Skeptical Inquirer, January, 139.

———. 1996. Climbing mount improbable. New York: Norton.

———. 1999. Foreword. In S. Blackmore, The meme machine, vii–xvii. New York: OxfordUniversity Press.

Dawson, E., T. Gilovich, and D. T. Regan. 2002. Motivated reasoning and performanceon the Wason selection task. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin 28:1379–87.

Deacon, T. 1997. The symbolic species: The co-evolution of language and brain. New York:Norton.

Deary, I. J. 2000. Looking down on human intelligence: From psychometrics to the brain.

Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Dehaene, S., and L. Naccache. 2001. Towards a cognitive neuroscience of consciousness:

Basic evidence and a workspace framework. Cognition 79:1–37.

Dempster, F. N. 1992. The rise and fall of the inhibitory mechanism: Toward a unifiedtheory of cognitive development and aging. Developmental Review 12:45–75.

Dempster, F. N., and A. J. Corkill. 1999. Interference and inhibition in cognition and behavior:

Unifying themes for educational psychology. Educational Psychology Review11:1–88.

Denes-Raj, V., and S. Epstein. 1994. Conflict between intuitive and rational processing:

When people behave against their better judgment. Journal of Personality and SocialPsychology 66:819–29.

Dennett, D.C. 1975. Why the law of effect will not go away. Journal of the Theory of SocialBehavior 2:169–87.

———. 1978. Brainstorms: Philosophical essays on mind and psychology. Cambridge, Mass.:MIT Press.

———. 1984. Elbow room: The varieties of free will worth wanting. Cambridge, Mass.:MIT Press.

———. 1987. The intentional stance. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.

———. 1988. Precis of The intentional stance. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 11:493–544.

———. 1991. Consciousness explained. Boston: Little, Brown.

———. 1993. Back from the drawing board. In Dennett and his critics, ed. B. Dahlbom,203–35. Cambridge, Mass.: Blackwell.

———. 1995. Darwin’s dangerous idea: Evolution and the meanings of life. New York:Simon and Schuster.

———. 1996. Kinds of minds: Toward an understanding of consciousness. New York:Basic Books.

———. 2001. Are we explaining consciousness yet? Cognition 79:221–37.

Denzau, A. T., and D.C. North. 1994. Shared mental models: Ideologies and institutions.Kyklos 47:3–31.

de Sousa, R. 1987. The rationality of emotion. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.

de Waal, F. 2002. Evolutionary psychology: The wheat and the chaff. Current Directions inPsychological Science 11, no. 6: 187–91.

de Zengotita, T. 2002. The numbing of the American mind: Culture as anesthetic.

Harper’s Magazine, April, 33–40.

Diener, E., E. M. Suh, R. E. Lucas, and H. L. Smith. 1999. Subjective well-being: Threedecades of progress. Psychological Bulletin 125:276–302.

Dienes, Z., and J. Perner, J. 1999. A theory of implicit and explicit knowledge. Behavioraland Brain Sciences 22:735–808.

Donald, M. 1991. Origins of the modern mind: Three stages in the evolution of culture andcognition. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.

———. 2001. A mind so rare: The evolution of human consciousness. New York: Norton.

Donaldson, M. 1978. Children’s minds. London: Fontana Paperbacks.

———. 1993. Human minds: An exploration. New York: Viking Penguin.

Drabble, M. 2001. The peppered moth. Toronto: McClelland and Stewart.

Dube, F. 2001. Quebec man kills self in act of road rage. National Post (Toronto),Nov. 9, A3.

Dugatkin, L. A. 2000. The imitation factor: Evolution beyond the gene. New York: Free Press.

Dulany, D. E., and D. J. Hilton. 1991. Conversational implicature, conscious representation,and the conjunction fallacy. Social Cognition 9:85–110.

Dunbar, R. 1998. Theory of mind and the evolution of language. In Approaches to the evolutionof language, ed. J. R. Hurford, M. Studdert-Kennedy, and C. Knight, 92–110.

Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Duncan, J., H. Emslie, P. Williams, R. Johnson, and C. Freer. 1996. Intelligence and thefrontal lobe: The organization of goal-directed behavior. Cognitive Psychology30:257–303.

Durham, W. 1991. Coevolution: Genes, culture, and human diversity. Stanford, Calif.:Stanford University Press.

Dworkin, G. 1988. The theory and practice of autonomy. Cambridge: Cambridge UniversityPress.

Dyer, F. N. 1973. The Stroop phenomenon and its use in the study of perceptual, cognitive,and response processes. Memory & Cognition 1:106–20.

Earman, J. 1992. Bayes or bust. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.

Edelman, G. M. 1992. Bright air, brilliant fire: On the matter of the mind. New York: BasicBooks.

Edwards, K., and E. E. Smith. 1996. A disconfirmation bias in the evaluation of arguments.

Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 71:5–24.

Edwards, W. 1954. The theory of decision making. Psychological Bulletin 51:380–417.

Eigen, M. 1992. Steps towards life. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Einhorn, H. J., and R. M. Hogarth. 1981. Behavioral decision theory: Processes of judgmentand choice. Annual Review of Psychology 32:53–88.

Elster, J. 1983. Sour grapes: Studies in the subversion of rationality. Cambridge: CambridgeUniversity Press.

———. 1989. Solomonic judgements. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Elster, J., and J. E. Roemer, eds. 1991. Interpersonal comparisons of well-being. Cambridge:Cambridge University Press.

Engle, R. W., S. W. Tuholski, J. E. Laughlin, and A. R. A. Conway. 1999. Working memory,short-term memory, and general fluid intelligence: A latent-variable approach.

Journal of Experimental Psychology: General 128:309–31.

Ennis, R. H. 1987. A taxonomy of critical thinking dispositions and abilities. In Teachingthinking skills: Theory and practice, ed. J. Baron and R. Sternberg, 9–26. New York:W. H. Freeman.

Epstein, S. 1994. Integration of the cognitive and the psychodynamic unconscious.

American Psychologist 49:709–24.

Estes, W. K. 1964. Probability learning. In Categories of human learning, ed. A. W. Melton,89–128. New York: Academic Press.

———. 1976. The cognitive side of probability learning. Psychological Review 83:37–64.

———. 1984. Global and local control of choice behavior by cyclically varying outcomeprobabilities. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition 10,no. 2: 258–70.

Evans, J. St. B. T. 1984. Heuristic and analytic processes in reasoning. British Journal ofPsychology 75:451–68.

———. 1989. Bias in human reasoning: Causes and consequences. London: LawrenceErlbaum Associates.

———. 1995. Relevance and reasoning. In Perspectives on thinking and reasoning, ed. S. E.

Newstead and J. St. B. T. Evans, 147–71. Hove, England: Lawrence ErlbaumAssociates.

———. 1996. Deciding before you think: Relevance and reasoning in the selection task.

British Journal of Psychology 87:223–40.

———. 1998. Matching bias in conditional reasoning: Do we understand it after 25years? Thinking and Reasoning 4:45–82.

———. 2002a. Logic and human reasoning: An assessment of the deduction paradigm.

Psychological Bulletin 128:978–96.

———. 2002b. Matching bias and set sizes: A discussion of Yama (2001). Thinking andReasoning 8:153–63.

———. 2002c. The influence of prior belief on scientific thinking. In The cognitive basis ofscience, ed. P. Carruthers, S. Stich, and M. Siegal, 193–210. Cambridge: CambridgeUniversity Press.

Evans, J. St. B. T., J. Barston, and P. Pollard. 1983. On the conflict between logic and beliefin syllogistic reasoning. Memory & Cognition 11:295–306.

Evans, J. St. B. T., S. E. Newstead, and R. M. J. Byrne. 1993. Human reasoning: The psychologyof deduction. Hove, England: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.

Evans, J. St. B. T., and D. E. Over. 1996. Rationality and reasoning. Hove, England:

Psychology Press.

———. 1999. Explicit representations in hypothetical thinking. Behavioral and BrainSciences 22:763–64.

Evans, J. St. B. T., D. E. Over, and K. Manktelow. 1993. Reasoning, decision making andrationality. Cognition 49:165–87.

Evans, J. St. B. T., J. H. Simon, N. Perham, D. E. Over, and V. A. Thompson. 2000.

Frequency versus probability formats in statistical word problems. Cognition77:197–213.

Evans, J. St. B. T., and P. C. Wason. 1976. Rationalization in a reasoning task. BritishJournal of Psychology 67:479–86.

Fantino, E., and A. Esfandiari. 2002. Probability matching: Encouraging optimal respondingin humans. Canadian Journal of Experimental Psychology 56:58–63.

Fiddick, L., L. Cosmides, and J. Tooby. 2000. No interpretation without representation:

The role of domain-specific representations and inferences in the Wason selectiontask. Cognition 77:1–79.

Fischhoff, B. 1988. Judgment and decision making. In The psychology of human thought,ed. R. J. Sternberg and E. E. Smith, 153–87. Cambridge: Cambridge UniversityPress.

———. 1991. Value elicitation: Is there anything there? American Psychologist 46:835–47.

Fischler, I. 1977. Semantic facilitation without association in a lexical decision task.

Memory & Cognition 5:335–39.

Fishburn, P. C. 1981. Subjective expected utility: A review of normative theories. Theoryand Decision 13:139–99.

———. 1999. The making of decision theory. In Decision science and technology:

Reflections on the contributions of Ward Edwards, ed. J. Shanteau, B. A. Mellers, andD. A. Schum, 369–88. Boston: Kluwer Academic Publishers.

Flanagan, O. 1992. Consciousness reconsidered. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.

———. 1996. Self expressions: Mind, morals, and the meaning of life. New York: OxfordUniversity Press.

———. 2002. The problem of the soul. New York: Basic Books.

Floden, R. E., M. Buchmann, and J. R. Schwille. 1987. Breaking with everyday experience.

Teacher’s College Record 88:485–506.

Fodor, J. 1983. The modularity of mind. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.

———. 1985. Precis of The modularity of mind. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 8:1–42.

Fodor, J. A., and Z. W. Pylyshyn. 1988. Connectionism and cognitive architecture:

A critical analysis. Cognition 28:3–71.

Foley, Richard. 1987. The theory of epistemic rationality. Cambridge, Mass.: HarvardUniversity Press.

———. 1991. Rationality, belief, and commitment. Synthese 89:365–92.

Foley, Robert. 1996. The adaptive legacy of human evolution: A search for the EEA.

Evolutionary Anthropology 4:194–203.

Frank, M. G., and T. Gilovich. 1988. The dark side of self- and social perception: Blackuniforms and aggression in professional sports. Journal of Personality and SocialPsychology 54:74–85.

Frank, R. H. 1988. Passions within reason: The strategic role of the emotions. New York:Norton.

———. 1999. Luxury fever: Why money fails to satisfy in an era of excess. New York: FreePress.

Frank, R. H., and P. J. Cook. 1995. The winner-take-all society. New York: Free Press.

Frankfurt, H. 1971. Freedom of the will and the concept of a person. Journal ofPhilosophy 68:5–20.

———. 1982. The importance of what we care about. Synthese 53:257–72.

Franzen, J. 2001. My father’s brain: What Alzheimer’s takes away. The New Yorker,September 10, 81–91.

Fridson, M. S. 1993. Investment illusions. New York: Wiley.

Friedrich, J. 1993. Primary error detection and minimization (PEDMIN) strategies insocial cognition: A reinterpretation of confirmation bias phenomena. PsychologicalReview 100:298–319.

Frisch, D., and J. K. Jones. 1993. Assessing the accuracy of decisions. Theory & Psychology,3:115–35.

Fry, A. F., and S. Hale. 1996. Processing speed, working memory, and fluid intelligence.

Psychological Science 7:237–41.

Funder, D.C. 1987. Errors and mistakes: Evaluating the accuracy of social judgment.

Psychological Bulletin 101:75–90.

Gal, I., and J. Baron. 1996. Understanding repeated simple choices. Thinking andReasoning 2:81–98.

Gardenfors, P., and N. Sahlin, eds. 1988. Decision, probability, and utility: Selected readings.

Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Gardner, H. 1983. Frames of mind. New York: Basic Books.

Garry, M., S. Frame, and E. F. Loftus. 1999. Lie down and tell me about your childhood.

In Mind myths: Exploring popular assumptions about the mind and brain, ed. S. DellaSala, 113–24. Chichester, England: Wiley.

Gauthier, D. 1975. Reason and maximization. Canadian Journal of Philosophy 4:411–33.

———. 1986. Morals by agreement. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

———, ed. 1990. Moral dealing: Contract, ethics, and reason. Ithaca, N.Y.: CornellUniversity Press.

Gazzaniga, M. S. 1989. Organization of the human brain. Science 245:947–52.

———. 1997. Why can’t I control my brain? Aspects of conscious experience. InCognition, computation, and consciousness, ed. M. Ito, Y. Miyashita, and E. T. Rolls,69–80. Oxford: Oxford

University Press.

———. 1998a. The mind’s past. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press.

———. 1998b. The split brain revisited. Scientific American, July, 51–55.

Gazzaniga, M. S., and J. E. LeDoux. 1978. The integrated mind. New York: Plenum.

Geary, D.C., and D. F. Bjorklund. 2000. Evolutionary developmental psychology. ChildDevelopment 71:57–65.

Geary, D.C., and K. J. Huffman. 2002. Brain and cognitive evolution: Forms of modularityand functions of mind. Psychological Bulletin 128:667–98.

Gebauer, G., and D. Laming. 1997. Rational choices in Wason’s selection task.

Psychological Research 60:284–93.

Gewirth, A. 1998. Self-fulfillment. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.

Gibbard, A. 1990. Wise choices, apt feelings: A theory of normative judgment. Cambridge,Mass.: Harvard University Press.

Gigerenzer, G. 1991. How to make cognitive illusions disappear: Beyond「heuristics andbiases.」European Review of Social Psychology 2:83–115.

———. 1993. The bounded rationality of probabilistic mental models. In Rationality:

Psychological and philosophical perspectives, ed. K. Manktelow and D. Over, 284–313.

London: Routledge.

———. 1994. Why the distinction between single-event probabilities and frequencies isimportant for psychology (and vice versa). In Subjective probability, ed. G. Wright andP. Ayton, 129–61.

Chichester, England: Wiley.

———. 1996a. On narrow norms and vague heuristics: A reply to Kahneman andTversky (1996). Psychological Review 103:592–96.

———. 1996b. Rationality: Why social context matters. In Interactive minds: Life-spanperspectives on the social foundation of cognition, ed. P. B. Baltes and U. Staudinger,319–46. Cambridge:

Cambridge University Press.

———. 1998. Ecological intelligence: An adaptation for frequencies. In The evolution ofmind, ed. D. D. Cummins and C. Allen, 9–29. New York: Oxford University Press.

———. 2002. Calculated risks: How to know when numbers deceive you. New York: Simonand Schuster.

Gigerenzer, G., and D. G. Goldstein. 1996. Reasoning the fast and frugal way: Models ofbounded rationality. Psychological Review 103:650–69.

Gigerenzer, G., and U. Hoffrage. 1995. How to improve Bayesian reasoning without instruction:

Frequency formats. Psychological Review 102:684–704.

Gigerenzer, G., U. Hoffrage, and A. Ebert. 1998. AIDS counselling for low-risk clients.

AIDS Care 10:197–211.

Gigerenzer, G., U. Hoffrage, and H. Kleinbolting. 1991. Probabilistic mental models:A Brunswikian theory of confidence. Psychological Review 98:506–28.

Gigerenzer, G., Z. Swijtink, T. Porter, L. Daston, J. Beatty, and L. Kruger. 1989. The empireof chance. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Gigerenzer, G., and P. M. Todd. 1999. Simple heuristics that make us smart. New York:Oxford University Press.

Gilbert, D. 1991. How mental systems believe. American Psychologist 46:107–19.

Gilovich, T. 1991. How we know what isn’t so. New York: Free Press.

Gilovich, T., D. W. Griffin, and D. Kahneman, eds. 2002. Heuristics and biases: Thepsychology of intuitive judgment. New York: Cambridge University Press.

Girotto, V., and M. Gonzalez. 2001. Solving probabilistic and statistical problems:

A matter of information structure and question form. Cognition 78:247–76.

Glenberg, A. M. 1997. What memory is for. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 20:1–55.

Godfrey-Smith, P. 1996. Complexity and the function of mind in nature. Cambridge:

Cambridge University Press.

Goel, V., and R. J. Dolan. 2003. Explaining modulation of reasoning by belief. Cognition87:B11–B22.

Goldman, A. I. 1978. Epistemics: The regulative theory of cognition. Journal ofPhilosophy 75:509–23.

———. 1986. Epistemology and cognition. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.

Goldstein, A. 1994. Addiction: From biology to drug policy. New York: W. H. Freeman.

Goldstein, D. G., and G. Gigerenzer. 1999. The recognition heuristic: How ignorancemakes us smart. In Simple heuristics that make us smart, ed. G. Gigerenzer and P. M.

Todd, 37–58. New York: Oxford University Press.

———. 2002. Models of ecological rationality: The recognition heuristic. PsychologicalReview 109:75–90.

Goody, E. N., ed. 1995. Social intelligence and interaction: Expressions and implications of thesocial bias in human intelligence. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Gopnik, A. 1993. How we know our minds: The illusion of first-person knowledge ofintentionality. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 16:1–14.

Gordon, R. A. 1997. Everyday life as an intelligence test: Effects of intelligence and intelligencecontext. Intelligence 24:203–320.

Gottfredson, L. S. 1997. Why g matters: The complexity of everyday life. Intelligence24:79–132.

Gould, S. J. 1989. Wonderful life: The Burgess shale and the nature of history. New York:Norton.

———. 1996. Full house: The spread of excellence from Plato to Darwin. New York:Harmony Books.

———. 2002. The structure of evolutionary theory. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard UniversityPress.

Grealy, L. 1995. Autobiography of a face. New York: HarperPerennial.

Greenwald, A. G. 1992. New look 3: Unconscious cognition reclaimed. AmericanPsychologist 47:766–79.

Greenwald, A. G., and M. R. Banaji. 1995. Implicit social cognition: Attitudes, selfesteem,and stereotypes. Psychological Review 102:4–27.

Greenwald, A. G., M. R. Banaji, L. A. Rudman, S. D. Farnham, B. A. Nosek, and D. S.

Mellott. 2002. A unified theory of implicit attitudes, stereotypes, self-esteem, andself-concept. Psychological Review 109:3–25.

Greider, W. 1992. Who will tell the people? New York: Simon and Schuster.

Grether, D. M., and C. R. Plott. 1979. Economic theory of choice and the preferencereversal phenomenon. American Economic Review 69:623–38.

Grice, H. P. 1975. Logic and conversation. In Syntax and semantics, vol. 3, Speech acts, ed.

P. Cole and J. Morgan, 41–58. New York: Academic Press.

Griffin, D. W., and C. A. Varey. 1996. Toward a consensus on overconfidence.

Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 65:227–31.

Griffiths, P. E. 1997. What emotions really are. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Grigorenko, E. L. 1999. Heredity versus environment as the basis of cognitive ability. InThe nature of cognition, ed. R. J. Sternberg, 665–96. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.

Gur, R., and H. Sackheim. 1979. Self-deception: A concept in search of a phenomenon.

Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 37:147–69.

Hacking, I. 1975. The emergence of probability. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

———. 1990. The taming of chance. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Haidt, J. 2001. The emotional dog and its rational tail: A social intuitionist approach tomoral judgment. Psychological Review 108:814–34.

Hallman, T. 2002. Sam: The boy behind the mask. New York: Putnam.

Hamilton, W. D. 1964. The genetical evolution of social behaviour (I and II). Journal ofTheoretical Biology 7:1–52.

———. 1966. The moulding of senescence by natural selection. Journal of TheoreticalBiology 12:12–45.

———. 1996. Narrow roads of gene land. Oxford: W. H. Freeman.

Hardin, G. 1968. The tragedy of the commons. Science 162:1243–48.

Hardman, D. 1998. Does reasoning occur on the selection task? A comparison ofrelevance-based theories. Thinking and Reasoning 4:353–76.

Hargreaves Heap, S. P. 1992. Rationality and economics. Cambridge: CambridgeUniversity Press.

Hargreaves Heap, S. P., and Y. Varoufakis. 1995. Game theory: A critical introduction.

London: Routledge.

Harman, G. 1993. Desired desires. In Value, welfare, and morality, ed. R. G. Frey and C. W.

Morris, 138–57. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

———. 1995. Rationality. In Thinking, ed. E. E. Smith and D. N. Osherson, 3:175–211.

Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.

Harnish, R. 2002. Minds, brains, and computers. Oxford: Blackwell.

Harnishfeger, K. K., and D. F. Bjorklund. 1994. A developmental perspective on individualdifferences in inhibition. Learning and Individual Differences 6:331–56.

Harries, C., and N. Harvey. 2000. Are absolute frequencies, relative frequencies, orboth effective in reducing cognitive biases? Journal of Behavioral Decision Making13:431–44.

Harris, P. L. 2001. The veridicality assumption. Mind and Language 16:247–62.

Harvey, N. 1992. Wishful thinking impairs belief-desire reasoning: A case of decouplingfailure in adults? Cognition 45:141–62.

Hasher, L., and R. T. Zacks. 1979. Automatic processing of fundamental information:

The case of frequency of occurrence. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General39:1372–88.

Haslam, N., and J. Baron. 1994. Intelligence, personality, and prudence. In Personalityand intelligence, ed. R. J. Sternberg and P. Ruzgis, 32–58. Cambridge: CambridgeUniversity Press.

Hastie, R., and R. M. Dawes. 2001. Rational choice in an uncertain world. Thousand Oaks,Calif.: Sage.

Hastie, R., and K. A. Rasinski. 1988. The concept of accuracy in social judgment. In Thesocial psychology of knowledge, ed. D. Bar-Tal and A. Kruglanski, 193–208. Cambridge:

Cambridge University Press.

Hausman, D. M. 1991. On dogmatism in economics: The case of preference reversals.

Journal of Socio-Economics 20:205–25.

Hausman, D. M., and M. McPherson. 1994. Economics, rationality, and ethics. In Thephilosophy of economics: An anthology, 2d ed., ed. D. M. Hausman, 252–77.

Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Hawking, S. 1988. A brief history of time. New York: Bantam Books.

Henle, M. 1962. On the relation between logic and thinking. Psychological Review69:366–78.

Hentoff, N. 1980. The first freedom: The tumultuous history of free speech in America. NewYork: Delacorte Press.

———. 1992. Free speech for me—But not for thee. New York: HarperCollins.

Hertwig, R., and G. Gigerenzer. 1999. The ‘conjunction fallacy’ revisited: How intelligentinferences look like reasoning errors. Journal of Behavioral Decision Making12:275–305.

Hilton, D. J. 1995. The social context of reasoning: Conversational inference andrational judgment. Psychological Bulletin 118:248–71.

Hilton, D. J., and B. R. Slugoski. 2000. Judgment and decision making in social context:

Discourse processes and rational inference. In Judgment and decision making: Aninterdisciplinary reader, 2d ed., ed. T. Connolly, H. R. Arkes, and K. R. Hammond,651–76. Cambridge, Mass.: Cambridge

University Press.

Hirsch, E. D. 1996. The schools we need: And why we don’t have them. New York:Doubleday.

Hirschfeld, L. A., and S. A. Gelman, eds. 1994. Mapping the mind: Domain specificity incognition and culture. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Hirschman, A. O. 1986. Rival views of market society and other recent essays. New York:Viking.

Hoch, S. J. 1987. Perceived consensus and predictive accuracy: The pros and cons of projection.

Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 53:221–34.

Hofstadter, D. R. 1982. Can creativity be mechanized? Scientific American, October, 18–34.

Hogarth, R. M. 2001. Educating intuition. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Holender, D. 1986. Semantic activation without conscious identification in dichotic listening,parafoveal vision, and visual masking: A survey and appraisal. Behavioral andBrain Sciences 9:1–66.

Hollis, M. 1992. Ethical preferences. In The theory of choice: A critical guide, ed.

S. Hargreaves Heap, M. Hollis, B. Lyons, R. Sugden, and A. Weale, 308–10. Oxford:Blackwell.

Horgan, T., and J. Tienson. 1993. Levels of description in nonclassical cognitive science.

In Philosophy and cognitive science, ed. C. Hookway and D. Peterson, 159–88.

Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Horn, J. L. 1982. The theory of fluid and crystallized intelligence in relation to conceptsof cognitive psychology and aging in adulthood. In Aging and cognitive processes, ed.

F. I. M. Craik and S. Trehub, 847–70. New York: Plenum.

Horn, J. L., and R. B. Cattell. 1967. Age differences in fluid and crystallized intelligence.

Acta Psychologica 26:1–23.

Hsee, C. K., G. F. Loewenstein, S. Blount, and M. H. Bazerman. 1999. Preference reversalsbetween joint and separate evaluations of options: A review and theoreticalanalysis. Psychological Bulletin

125:576–90.

Hull, D. L. 1982. The naked meme. In Learning, development, and culture: Essays in evolutionaryepistemology, ed. H. C. Plotkin, 273–327. Chichester, England: Wiley.

———. 1988. Science as a process: An evolutionary account of the social and conceptual developmentof science. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

———. 2000. Taking memetics seriously: Memetics will be what we make it. InDarwinizing culture: The status of memetics as a science, ed. R. Aunger, 43–67. Oxford:Oxford University Press.

———. 2001. Science and selection: Essays on biological evolution and the philosophy ofscience. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Hume, D. [1740] 1888. A treatise of human nature. Edited by L. A. Selby-Bigge. London:

Oxford University Press.

Humphrey, N. 1976. The social function of intellect. In Growing points in ethology,ed. P. P. G. Bateson and R. A. Hinde, 303–17. London: Faber and Faber.

———. 1986. The inner eye. London: Faber and Faber.

———. 1993. A history of mind: Evolution and the birth of consciousness. New York:HarperPerennial.

Hunt, E. 1978. Mechanics of verbal ability. Psychological Review 85:109–30.

———. 1987. The next word on verbal ability. In Speed of information-processing and intelligence,ed. P. A. Vernon, 347–92. Norwood, N.J.: Ablex.

———. 1995. Will we be smart enough? A cognitive analysis of the coming workforce.

New York: Russell Sage Foundation.

———. 1999. Intelligence and human resources: Past, present, and future. In The futureof learning and individual differences research: Processes, traits, and content, ed.

P. Ackerman and P. Kyllonen, 3–28. Washington, D.C.: American PsychologicalAssociation.

Hurley, S. L. 1989. Natural reasons: Personality and polity. New York: Oxford UniversityPress.

Hurst, L. 2001. Suicide warriors: Deactivating extremists not easy, experts say. TorontoStar. November 3, A1–A4.

Huxley, T. H. [1894] 1989. Evolution and ethics. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton UniversityPress.

Jackendoff, R. 1996. How language helps us think. Pragmatics and Cognition 4:1–34.

James, L., and D. Nahl. 2000. Road rage and aggressive driving: Steering clear of highwaywarfare. Amherst, N.Y.: Prometheus Books.

Jeffrey, R. C. 1974. Preferences among preferences. Journal of Philosophy 71:377–91.

———. 1983. The logic of decision. 2d ed. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Jepson, C., D. Krantz, and R. Nisbett. 1983. Inductive reasoning: Competence or skill?

Behavioral and Brain Sciences 6:494–501.

Johnson, E. J., J. Hershey, J. Meszaros, and H. Kunreuther. 2000. Framing, probabilitydistortions, and insurance decisions. In Choices, values, and frames, ed. D. Kahnemanand A. Tversky, 224–40.

Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Johnson, H., and D. S. Broder. 1996. The system: The American way of politics at the breakingpoint. Boston: Little, Brown.

Johnson, M. K. 1991. Reality monitoring: Evidence from confabulation in organic braindisease patients. In Awareness of deficit after brain injury, ed. G. Prigantano andD. Schacter, 121–40. New

York: Oxford University Press.

Johnson-Laird, P. N. 1983. Mental models. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.

———. 1988. The computer and the mind: An introduction to cognitive science. Cambridge,Mass.: Harvard University Press.

———. 1999. Deductive reasoning. Annual Review of Psychology 50:109–35.

———. 2001. Mental models and deduction. Trends in Cognitive Sciences 5:434–42.

Johnson-Laird, P. N., and R. M. J. Byrne. 1991. Deduction. Hillsdale, N.J.: LawrenceErlbaum Associates.

———. 1993. Models and deductive rationality. In Rationality: Psychological and philosophicalperspectives, ed. K. Manktelow and D. Over, 177–210. London: Routledge.

Johnson-Laird, P., and K. Oatley. 1992. Basic emotions, rationality, and folk theory.

Cognition and Emotion 6:201–23.

———. 2000. Cognitive and social construction in emotions. In Handbook of emotions,2d ed., ed. M. Lewis and J. Haviland-Jones, 458–75. New York: Guilford Press.

Johnson-Laird, P. N., and F. Savary. 1996. Illusory inferences about probabilities. ActaPsychologica 93:69–90.

Jolly, A. 1966. Lemur social behaviour and primate intelligence. Science 153:501–6.

Kagel, C. J. 1987. Economics according to the rats (and pigeons too): What have welearned and what we hope to learn. In Laboratory experimentation in economics: Sixpoints of view, ed. A. Roth, 587

–703. New York: Cambridge University Press.

Kahne, J. 1996. The politics of self-esteem. American Educational Research Journal 33:3–22.

Kahneman, D. 1981. Who shall be the arbiter of our intuitions? Behavioral and BrainSciences 4:339–40.

———. 1991. Judgment and decision making: A personal view. Psychological Science2:142–45.

———. 1994. New challenges to the rationality assumption. Journal of Institutional andTheoretical Economics 150:18–36.

———. 2000. A psychological point of view: Violations of rational rules as a diagnosticof mental processes. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 23:681–83.

Kahneman, D., E. Diener, and N. Schwarz, eds. 1999. Well-being: The foundations of hedonicpsychology. Thousand Oaks, Calif.: Sage.

Kahneman, D., and S. Frederick. 2002. Representativeness revisited: Attribute substitutionin intuitive judgment. In Heuristics and biases: The psychology of intuitive judgment,ed. T. Gilovich, D.

Griffin, and D. Kahneman, 49–81. New York: CambridgeUniversity Press.

Kahneman, D., and J. Snell. 1990. Predicting utility. In Insights into decision making, ed.

R. M. Hogarth, 295–310. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Kahneman, D., and A. Tversky. 1973. On the psychology of prediction. PsychologicalReview 80:237–51.

———. 1979. Prospect theory: An analysis of decision under risk. Econometrica 47:263–91.

———. 1982. On the study of statistical intuitions. Cognition 11:123–41.

———. 1983. Can irrationality be intelligently discussed? Behavioral and Brain Sciences6:509–10.

———. 1984. Choices, values, and frames. American Psychologist 39:341–50.

———. 1996. On the reality of cognitive illusions. Psychological Review 103:582–91.

———, eds. 2000. Choices, values, and frames. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Kahneman, D., P. P. Wakker, and R. Sarin. 1997. Back to Bentham? Explorations of experiencedutility. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 112, no. 2: 375–405.

Kane, M. J., and R. W. Engle. 2002. The role of prefrontal cortex working-memory capacity,executive attention, and general fluid intelligence: An individual-differences perspective.

Psychonomic Bulletin and Review 9:637–71.

Kao, S. F., and E. A. Wasserman. 1993. Assessment of an information integration accountof contingency judgment with examination of subjective cell importance andmethod of information presentation.

Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,Memory, and Cognition 19:1363–86.

Kardash, C. M., and R. J. Scholes. 1996. Effects of pre-existing beliefs, epistemologicalbeliefs, and need for cognition on interpretation of controversial issues. Journal ofEducational Psychology 88:260–71.

Karmiloff-Smith, A. 1992. Beyond modularity: A developmental perspective on cognitive science.

Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.

Keating, D. P. 1990. Charting pathways to the development of expertise. EducationalPsychologist 25:243–67.

Keil, F. C., and R. A. Wilson, eds. 2000. Explanation and cognition. Cambridge, Mass.:MIT Press.

Kekes, J. 1990. Facing evil. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.

Kenrick, D. T. 2001. Evolutionary psychology, cognitive science, and dynamical systems:

Building an integrative paradigm. Current Directions in Psychological Science 10:13–17.

Kettlewell, H. 1973. The evolution of melanism. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Kimberg, D. Y., M. D’Esposito, and M. J. Farah. 1998. Cognitive functions in the prefrontalcortex—working memory and executive control. Current Directions inPsychological Science 6:185–92.

Kimberg, D. Y., and M. J. Farah. 1993. A unified account of cognitive impairments followingfrontal lobe damage: The role of working memory in complex, organizedbehavior. Journal of Experimental

Psychology: General 122:411–28.

Kirkpatrick, L., and S. Epstein. 1992. Cognitive-experiential self-theory and subjectiveprobability: Evidence for two conceptual systems. Journal of Personality and SocialPsychology 63:534–44.

Kirkwood, T., and R. Holliday. 1979. The evolution of ageing and longevity. Proceedingsof the Royal Society of London B, 205:531–46.

Kitcher, P. 1993. The advancement of science. New York: Oxford University Press.

Klaczynski, P. A. 2001. Analytic and heuristic processing influences on adolescent reasoningand decision making. Child Development 72:844–61.

Klaczynski, P. A., D. H. Gordon, and J. Fauth. 1997. Goal-oriented critical reasoning andindividual differences in critical reasoning biases. Journal of Educational Psychology89:470–85.

Klayman, J., and Y. Ha. 1987. Confirmation, disconfirmation, and information in hypothesistesting. Psychological Review 94:211–28.

Klein, G. 1998. Sources of power: How people make decisions. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.

Klein, G. S. 1964. Semantic power measured through the interference of words withcolor-naming. American Journal of Psychology 77:576–88.

Kleindorfer, P. R., H. C. Kunreuther, and P. J. H. Schoemaker. 1993. Decision sciences: Anintegrative perspective. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Koehler, J. J. 1993. The influence of prior beliefs on scientific judgments of evidencequality. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 56:28–55.

———. 1996. The base rate fallacy reconsidered: Descriptive, normative and methodologicalchallenges. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 19:1–53.

Kohler, W. 1927. The mentality of apes. 2d ed. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.

Kokis, J., R. Macpherson, M. Toplak, R. F. West, and K. E. Stanovich. 2002. Heuristic andanalytic processing: Age trends and associations with cognitive ability and cognitivestyles. Journal of

Experimental Child Psychology 83:26–52.

Komorita, S. S., and C. D. Parks. 1994. Social dilemmas. Boulder, Colo.: Westview Press.

Krantz, D. H. 1981. Improvements in human reasoning and an error in L. J. Cohen’s.

Behavioral and Brain Sciences 4:340–41.

Kroll, L., and L. Goldman. 2002. The global billionaires. Forbes 169, no. 6 (March 18):

119–32.

Krueger, J., and J. Zeiger. 1993. Social categorization and the truly false consensus effect.

Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 65:670–80.

Kruglanski, A. W. 1990. Lay epistemics theory in social-cognitive psychology.

Psychological Inquiry 1:181–97.

Kruglanski, A. W., and I. Ajzen. 1983. Bias and error in human judgment. EuropeanJournal of Social Psychology 13:1–44.

Kruglanski, A. W., and D. M. Webster. 1996. Motivated closing the mind:「Seizing」and「freezing.」Psychological Review 103:263–83.

Kuhberger, A. 2002. The rationality of risky decisions: A changing message. Theory &Psychology 12:427–52.

Kuhn, D. 1991. The skills of argument. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

———. 1996. Is good thinking scientific thinking? In Modes of thought: Explorations inculture and cognition, ed. D. R. Olson and N. Torrance, 261–81. New York:Cambridge University Press.

———. 2001. How do people know? Psychological Science 12:1–8.

Kummer, H., L. Daston, G. Gigerenzer, and J. B. Silk. 1997. The social intelligence hypothesis.

In Human by nature: Between biology and the social sciences, ed. P. Weingart,S. D. Mitchell, P. J. Richerson, and S. Maasen, 157–79. Mahwah, N.J.: LawrenceErlbaum Associates.

Kunda, Z. 1990. The case for motivated reasoning. Psychological Bulletin 108:480–98.

———. 1999. Social cognition: Making sense of people. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.

Kuttner, R. 1998. Everything for sale: The virtues and limits of markets. Chicago: Universityof Chicago Press.

LaBerge, D., and S. Samuels. 1974. Toward a theory of automatic information processingin reading. Cognitive Psychology 6:293–323.

LaCerra, P., and R. Bingham. 1998. The adaptive nature of the human neurocognitivearchitecture: An alternative model. Proceeds of the National Academy of Sciences95:11290–94.

Langlois, J. H., L. Kalakanis, A. J. Rubenstein, A. Larson, M. Hallam, and M. Smott.

2000. Maxims or myths of beauty? A meta-analytic and theoretical review.

Psychological Bulletin 126:390–423.

Langer, E. J. 1989. Mindfulness. Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley.

Langer, E. J., A. Blank, and B. Chanowitz. 1978. The mindlessness of ostensibly thoughtfulaction: The role of「placebic」information in interpersonal interaction. Journal ofPersonality and Social

Psychology 36:635–42.

Lasn, K. 1999. Culture jam: The uncooling of America. New York: William Morrow.

Laudan, L. 1996. Beyond positivism and relativism. Boulder, Colo.: Westview Press.

Lefkowitz, B. 1997. Our guys: The Glen Ridge rape and the secret life of the perfect suburb.

Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press.

Lehrer, K. 1990. Theory of knowledge. London: Routledge.

———. 1997. Self-trust: A study of reason, knowledge, and autonomy. Oxford: OxfordUniversity Press.

Leslie, A. M. 1987. Pretense and representation: The origins of「theory of mind.」

Psychological Review 94:412–26.

———. 1994. ToMM, ToBY, and agency: Core architecture and domain specificity. InMapping the mind: Domain specificity in cognition and culture, ed. L. A. Hirschfeld andS. A. Gelman, 119–48.

Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

———. 2000. How to acquire a representational theory of mind. In Metarepresentations:

A multidisciplinary perspective, ed. D. Sperber, 197–223. Oxford: Oxford UniversityPress.

Levelt, W. 1995. Chapters of psychology. In The science of the mind: 2001 and beyond, ed.

R. L. Solso and D. W. Massaro, 184–202. New York: Oxford University Press.

Levinson, S. C. 1995. Interactional biases in human thinking. In Social intelligence andinteraction, ed. E. Goody, 221–260. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Lewis, C., and G. Keren. 1999. On the difficulties underlying Bayesian reasoning: A commenton Gigerenzer and Hoffrage. Psychological Review 106:411–16.

Lewis, D. 1989. Dispositional theories of value. Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society,supplementary vol. 63, 113–37.

Liberman, N., and Y. Klar. 1996. Hypothesis testing in Wason’s selection task: Socialexchange cheating detection or task understanding. Cognition 58:127–56.

Lichtenstein, S., and P. Slovic. 1971. Reversal of preferences between bids and choicesin gambling decisions. Journal of Experimental Psychology 89:46–55.

Lieberman, M. D. 2000. Intuiton: A social cognitive neuroscience approach.

Psychological Bulletin 126:109–37.

Lillard, A. 2001. Pretend play as twin Earth: A social-cognitive analysis. DevelopmentalReview 21:495–531.

Lindblom, C. E. 2001. The market system. New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press.

Lindsay, P., and D. Norman. 1977. Human information processing. 2d ed. New York:Academic Press.

Lipman, M. 1991. Thinking in education. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Lodge, D. 2001. Thinks . . . London: Secker and Warburg.

Loewenstein, G. F. 1996. Out of control: Visceral influences on behavior. OrganizationalBehavior and Human Decision Processes 65:272–92.

Loewenstein, G. F., E. U. Weber, C. K. Hsee, and N. Welch. 2001. Risk as feelings.

Psychological Bulletin 127:267–86.

Loftus, E. F. 1997. Memory for a past that never was. Current Directions in PsychologicalScience 6:60–65.

Loftus, E. F., and K. Ketcham. 1994. The myth of repressed memory: False memories and allegationsof sexual abuse. New York: St. Martins.

Logan, G. D. 1985. Skill and automaticity: Relations, implications, and future directions.

Canadian Journal of Psychology 39:367–86.

Lohman, D. F. 2000. Complex information processing and intelligence. In Handbook ofintelligence, ed. R. J. Sternberg, 285–340. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Loomes, G., and R. Sugden. 1982. Regret theory: An alternative theory of rational choiceunder uncertainty. The Economic Journal 92:805–24.

Lubinski, D. 2000. Scientific and social significance of assessing individual differences:

「Sinking shafts at a few critical points.」Annual Review of Psychology 51:405–44.

Lubinski, D., and L. G. Humphreys. 1997. Incorporating general intelligence into epidemiologyand the social sciences. Intelligence 24:159–201.

Luce, R. D., and H. Raiffa. 1957. Games and decisions. New York: Wiley.

Lumsden, C. J., and E. O. Wilson. 1981. Genes, mind and culture. Cambridge, Mass.:Harvard University Press.

Luria, A. R. 1976. Cognitive development: Its cultural and social foundations. Cambridge,Mass.: Harvard University Press.

Luttwak, E. 1999. Turbo-capitalism: Winners and losers in the global economy. New York:HarperCollins.

Lynch, A. 1996. Thought contagion. New York: Basic Books.

Macchi, L., and G. Mosconi. 1998. Computational features vs frequentist phrasing in thebase-rate fallacy. Swiss Journal of Psychology 57:79–85.

Macdonald, R. R., and K. J. Gilhooly. 1990. More about Linda or conjunctions in context.

European Journal of Cognitive Psychology 2:57–70.

MacIntyre, A. 1990. Is akratic action always irrational? In Identity, character, and morality,ed. O. Flanagan and A. O. Rorty, 379–400. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.

Macintyre, B. 2001. Word bombs. The Times (London), October 9, sect. 2, 2–3.

MacLeod, C. M. 1991. Half a century of research on the Stroop effect: An integrativereview. Psychological Bulletin 109:163–203.

———. 1992. The Stroop task: The「gold standard」of attentional measures. Journal ofExperimental Psychology: General 121:12–14.

MacLeod, C. M., and P. A. MacDonald. 2000. Interdimensional interference in theStroop effect: Uncovering the cognitive and neural anatomy of attention. Trends inCognitive Sciences 4, no. 10: 383–91.

Maher, P. 1993. Betting on theories. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Majerus, M. E. N. 1998. Melanism: Evolution in action. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Makin, K. 2001. Man recants repressed「memories.」Globe and Mail (Toronto),November 3, A12.

Malik, K. 2000. Man, beast and zombie: What science can and cannot tell us about humannature. London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson.

Malle, B. F., L. J. Moses, and D. A. Baldwin, eds. 2001. Intentions and intentionality:

Foundations of social cognition. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.

Manktelow, K. I. 1999. Reasoning and Thinking. Hove, England: Psychology Press.

Manktelow, K. I., and J. St. B. T. Evans. 1979. Facilitation of reasoning by realism: Effector non-effect? British Journal of Psychology 70:477–88.

Manktelow, K. I., and D. E. Over. 1991. Social roles and utilities in reasoning with deonticconditionals. Cognition 39:85–105.

———. 1995. Deontic reasoning. In Perspectives on thinking and reasoning: Essays in honourof Peter Wason, ed. S. E. Newstead and J. St. B. T. Evans, 91–114. Hove, England:

Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.

Mann, L., R. Harmoni, and C. Power. 1991. The GOFER course in decision making. InTeaching decision making to adolescents, ed. J. Baron and R. V. Brown, 61–78.

Hillsdale, N.J.: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.

Marcel, A. J. 1983. Conscious and unconscious perception: Experiments on visual maskingand word recognition. Cognitive Psychology 15:197–237.

———. 1988. Phenomenal experience and functionalism. In Consciousness in contemporaryscience, ed. A. J. Marcel and E. Bisiach, 121–58. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Margolis, H. 1996. Dealing with risk. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Markovits, H., and G. Nantel. 1989. The belief-bias effect in the production and evaluationof logical conclusions. Memory and Cognition 17:11–17.

Markowitz, H. M. 1952. The utility of wealth. Journal of Political Economy 60:151–58.

Marr, D. 1982. Vision. San Francisco: W. H. Freeman.

Masson, M. E. J. 1995. A distributed memory model of semantic priming. Journal ofExperimental Psychology: Learning, Memory and Cognition 21:3–23.

Matthews, G., and I. J. Deary. 1998. Personality traits. Cambridge: Cambridge UniversityPress.

Maynard Smith, J. M. 1974. The theory of games and the evolution of animal conflict.

Journal of Theoretical Biology 47:209–21.

———. 1975. The theory of evolution. 3d ed. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

———. 1976. Evolution and the theory of games. American Scientist 64:41–45.

———. 1998. Evolutionary genetics. 2d ed. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Maynard Smith, J. M., and E. Szathmáry. 1999. The origins of life. Oxford: OxfordUniversity Press.

McCauley, R. N. 2000. The naturalness of religion and the unnaturalness of science. InExplanation and cognition, ed. F. C. Keil and R. A. Wilson, 61–85. Cambridge, Mass.:MIT Press.

McEwan, I. 1998. Enduring love. London: Vintage.

McFadden, D. 1999. Rationality for economists? Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 19:

73–105.

McFarland, D. 1989. Goals, no goals, and own goals. In Goals, no goals, and own goals:

A debate on goal-directed and intentional behavior, ed. A. Montefiori and D. Noble,39–57. London: Unwin Hyman.

McGinn, C. 1999. The mysterious flame: Conscious minds in a material world. New York:Basic Books.

McKenzie, C. R. M. 1994. The accuracy of intuitive judgment strategies: Covariation assessmentand Bayesian inference. Cognitive Psychology 26:209–39.

McNeil, B., S. Pauker, H. Sox, and A. Tversky. 1982. On the elicitation of preferences foralternative therapies. New England Journal of Medicine 306:1259–62.

Medin, D. L., and M. H. Bazerman. 1999. Broadening behavioral decision research:

Multiple levels of cognitive processing. Psychonomic Bulletin and Review 6:533–46.

Medin, D. L., H. C. Schwartz, S. V. Blok, and L. A. Birnbaum. 1999. The semantic side ofdecision making. Psychonomic Bulletin and Review 6:562–69.

Mele, A. R. 1987. Recent work on self-deception. American Philosophical Quarterly24:1–17.

———. 1997. Real self-deception. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 20:91–136.

———. 2001. Self-deception unmasked. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.

Mellers, B. A. 2000. Choice and the relative pleasure of consequences. PsychologicalBulletin 126:910–24.

Mellers, B. A., and K. Biagini. 1994. Similarity and choice. Psychological Review 101:

505–18.

Mellers, B. A., R. Hertwig, and D. Kahneman. 2001. Do frequency representations eliminateconjunction effects? An exercise in adversarial collaboration. PsychologicalScience 12:269–75.

Mellers, B. A., and A. P. McGraw. 1999. How to improve Bayesian reasoning: Commenton Gigerenzer and Hoffrage (1995). Psychological Review 106:417–24.

Mercer, T. 2000. Navigating the shark-eat-shark world of ‘compassionate’ airfares. TheGlobe and Mail (Toronto), September 16, T5.

Merikle, P. M., D. Smilek, and J. D. Eastwood. 2001. Perception without awareness:

Perspectives from cognitive psychology. Cognition 79:115–34.

Messick, S. 1984. The nature of cognitive styles: Problems and promise in educationalpractice. Educational Psychologist 19:59–74.

———. 1994. The matter of style: Manifestations of personality in cognition, learning,and teaching. Educational Psychologist 29:121–36.

Metcalfe, J., and W. Mischel. 1999. A hot/cool-system analysis of delay of gratification:

Dynamics of will power. Psychological Review 106:3–19.

Milgram, S. 1974. Obedience to authority. New York: Harper and Row.

Miller, G. 2001. The mating mind. New York: Anchor Books.

Millgram, E. 1997. Practical induction. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.

Millikan, R. G. 1993. White Queen psychology and other essays for Alice. Cambridge, Mass.:MIT Press.

Minsky, M. 1985. The society of mind. New York: Simon and Schuster.

Mitchell, P., E. J. Robinson, J. E. Isaacs, and R. M. Nye. 1996. Contamination in reasoningabout false belief: An instance of realist bias in adults but not children. Cognition59:1–21.

Mithen, S. 1996. The prehistory of mind: The cognitive origins of art and science. London:

Thames and Hudson.

———. Palaeoanthropological perspectives on the theory of mind. In Understandingother minds: Perspectives from developmental cognitive neuroscience, 2d ed., ed S. Baron-Cohen, H. Tager-Flusberg,

and D. J. Cohen, 488–502. Oxford: Oxford UniversityPress.

———. 2002. Human evolution and the cognitive basis of science. In The cognitive basisof science, ed. P. Carruthers, S. Stich, and M. Siegel, 23–40. Cambridge: CambridgeUniversity Press.

Miyake, A., and P. Shah, eds. 1999. Models of working memory: Mechanisms of active maintenanceand executive control. New York: Cambridge University Press.

Moldoveanu, M., and E. Langer. 2002. False memories of the future: A critique of the applicationof probabilistic reasoning to the study of cognitive processes. PsychologicalReview 109:358–75.

Morton, O. 1997. Doing what comes naturally: A new school of psychology finds reasonsfor your foolish heart. The New Yorker 73 (Nov. 3): 102–7.

Moscovitch, M. 1989. Confabulation and the frontal systems: Strategic versus associativeretrieval in neuropsychological theories of memory. In Varieties of memory and consciousness, ed. H. L. Roediger and F. I. M. Craik, 133–60. Hillsdale, N.J.: LawrenceErlbaum Associates.

Moshman, D. 1994. Reasoning, metareasoning, and the promotion of rationality. InIntelligence, mind, and reasoning: Structure and development, ed. A. Demetriou andA. Efklides, 135–50. Amsterdam:

Elsevier.

Mueser, P. R., N. Cowan, and K. T. Mueser. 1999. A generalized signal detection modelto predict rational variation in base rate use. Cognition 69:267–312.

Mussweiler, T., F. Strack, and T. Pfeiffer. 2000. Overcoming the inevitable anchoring effect:

Considering the opposite compensates for selective accessibility. Personality andSocial Psychology Bulletin 9:1142–50.

Myers, D. G. 2000. The American paradox: Spiritual hunger in an age of plenty. New Haven,Conn.: Yale University Press.

———. 2002. Intuition: Its powers and perils. New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press.

Mynatt, C. R., M. E. Doherty, and W. Dragan. 1993. Information relevance, workingmemory, and the consideration of alternatives. Quarterly Journal of ExperimentalPsychology 46A:759–78.

Nagel, T. 1997. The last word. New York: Oxford University Press.

Nathanson, S. 1994. The ideal of rationality. Chicago: Open Court.

National Highway Traffic Safety Administration. 1999. Traffic safety facts 1999: Children.

Fact sheet: DOT HS 809 087. Washington, D.C.: NHTSA. Retrieved November 24,2000, from the World Wide Web:

http://www.nhtsa.dot.gov/people/ncsa/pdf/child99.pdf.

Navon, D. 1989. The importance of being visible: On the role of attention in a mindviewed as an anarchic intelligence system. European Journal of Cognitive Psychology1:191–238.

Neely, J. H., and D. E. Keefe. 1989. Semantic context effects on visual word processing:

A hybrid prospective-retrospective processing theory. In The psychology of learningand motivation, ed. G. H. Bower, 24:207–48. San Diego: Academic Press.

Neimark, E. 1987. Adventures in thinking. San Diego: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich.

Neisser, U., G. Boodoo, T. Bouchard, A. W. Boykin, N. Brody, S. J. Ceci, D. Halpern,J. Loehlin, R. Perloff, R. Sternberg, and S. Urbina. 1996. Intelligence: Knowns andunknowns. American

Psychologist 51:77–101.

Nelson, K. 1996. Language in cognitive development: The emergence of the mediated mind.

Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Neumann, P. J., and P. E. Politser. 1992. Risk and optimality. In Risk-taking behavior, ed.

J. F. Yates, 27–47. Chichester, England: Wiley.

Neurath, O. 1932–33. Protokollsatze. Erkenntis 3:204–14.

Newell, A. 1982. The knowledge level. Artificial Intelligence 18:87–127.

———. 1990. Unified theories of cognition. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.

Newstead, S. E., and J. St. B. T. Evans, eds. 1995. Perspectives on thinking and reasoning.

Hove, England: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.

Nickerson, R. S. 1988. On improving thinking through instruction. In Review of Researchin Education, vol. 15, ed. E. Z. Rothkopf, 3–57. Washington, D.C.: AmericanEducational Research Association.

———. 1996. Hempel’s paradox and Wason’s selection task: Logical and psychologicalpuzzles of confirmation. Thinking and Reasoning 2:1–31.

———. 1998. Confirmation bias: A ubiquitous phenomenon in many guises. Review ofGeneral Psychology 2:175–220.

Nicolson, A. 2000. Perch Hill. London: Penguin Books.

Nisbett, R. E. 1993. Rules for reasoning. Hillsdale, N.J.: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.

Nisbett, R. E., and L. Ross, L. 1980. Human inference: Strategies and shortcomings of socialjudgment. Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall.

Nisbett, R. E., and S. Schachter. 1966. Cognitive manipulation of pain. Journal ofExperimental Social Psychology 21:227–36.

Nisbett, R. E., and T. D. Wilson. 1977. Telling more than we can know: Verbal reports onmental processes. Psychological Review 84:231–59.

Norman, D. A., and T. Shallice. 1986. Attention to action: Willed and automatic controlof behavior. In Consciousness and self-regulation, ed. R. J. Davidson, G. E. Schwartz,and D. Shapiro, 1–18.

New York: Plenum.

Nozick, R. 1974. Anarchy, state, and utopia. New York: Basic Books.

———. 1981. Philosophical explanations. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.

———. 1989. The examined life. New York: Simon and Schuster.

———. 1993. The nature of rationality. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.

———. 2001. Invariances: The structure of the objective world. Cambridge, Mass.: HarvardUniversity Press.

Oaksford, M., and N. Chater. 1993. Reasoning theories and bounded rationality. InRationality: Psychological and philosophical perspectives, ed. K. Manktelow and D. Over,31–60. London: Routledge.

———. 1994. A rational analysis of the selection task as optimal data selection.

Psychological Review 101:608–31.

———. 1995. Theories of reasoning and the computational explanation of everyday inference.

Thinking and Reasoning 1:121–52.

———. 1996. Rational explanation of the selection task. Psychological Review 103:381–91.

———, eds. 1998. Rationality in an uncertain world. Hove, England: Psychology Press.

———. 2001. The probabilistic approach to human reasoning. Trends in CognitiveSciences 5:349–57.

Oatley, K. 1992. Best laid schemes: The psychology of emotions. Cambridge: CambridgeUniversity Press.

———. 1998. The structure of emotions. In Mind readings, ed. P. Thagard, 239–57.

Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.

Orwell, G. 1950. Shooting an elephant and other essays. New York: Harcourt, Brace andWorld.

Osherson, D. N. 1995. Probability judgment. In Thinking, vol. 3, ed. E. E. Smith andD. N. Osherson, 35–75. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.

Over, D. E. 2000. Ecological rationality and its heuristics. Thinking and Reasoning 6:

182–92.

———. 2002. The rationality of evolutionary psychology. In Reason and nature: Essays inthe theory of rationality, ed. J. L. Bermudez and A. Millar, 187–207. Oxford: OxfordUniversity Press.

———, ed., 2003a. Evolution and the psychology of thinking: The debate. Hove, England:

Psychology Press.

———. 2003b. From massive modularity to metarepresentation: The evolution ofhigher cognition. In Evolution and the psychology of thinking: The debate, ed. D. Over,121–44. Hove, England:

Psychology Press.

Over, D. E., and J. St. B. T. Evans. 2000. Rational distinctions and adaptations. Behavioraland Brain Sciences 23:693–94.

Over, D. E., and D. W. Green. 2001. Contingency, causation, and adaptive inference.

Psychological Review 108:682–84.

Pacini, R., and S. Epstein. 1999. The interaction of three facets of concrete thinking in agame of chance. Thinking and Reasoning 5:303–25.

Papineau, D. 2001. The evolution of means-ends reasoning. In Naturalism, evolution andmind, ed. D. M. Walsh, 145–78. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Parfit, D. 1984. Reasons and persons. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Parkin, A. J. 1996. Explorations in cognitive neuropsychology. Oxford: Blackwell.

Partridge, J. 1997. Changing faces: The challenge of facial disfigurement. 3d ed. East GrandRapids, Mich.: Phoenix Society for Burn Survivors.

Paul, R. W. 1984. Critical thinking: Fundamental to education for a free society.

Educational Leadership 42, no. 1: 4–14.

———. 1987. Critical thinking and the critical person. In Thinking: The second internationalconference, ed. D. N. Perkins, J. Lockhead, and J. Bishop, 373–403. Hillsdale,N.J.: Lawrence Erlbaum

Associates.

Paul, R., A. Binker, D. Martin, and K. Adamson. 1989. Critical thinking handbook: Highschool. Rohnert Park, Calif.: Center for Critical Thinking and Moral Critique.

Payne, J. W., J. R. Bettman, and E. J. Johnson. 1992. Behavioral decision research: A constructiveprocessing perspective. Annual Review of Psychology 43:87–131.

Payne, J., J. Bettman, and D. Schkade. 1999. Measuring constructed preferences: Towardsa building code. Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 19:243–70.

Pearce, D. W. 1995. The MIT dictionary of modern economics. Cambridge: MIT Press.

Pennington, B. F., and S. Ozonoff. 1996. Executive functions and developmentalpsychopathology. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry 37:51–87.

Perkins, D. N. 1995. Outsmarting IQ: The emerging science of learnable intelligence. NewYork: Free Press.

Perkins, D. N., and T. A. Grotzer. 1997. Teaching intelligence. American Psychologist52:1125–33.

Perkins, D. N., E. Jay, and S. Tishman. 1993. Beyond abilities: A dispositional theory ofthinking. Merrill-Palmer Quarterly 39:1–21.

Perner, J. 1991. Understanding the representational mind. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.

———. 1998. The meta-intentional nature of executive functions and theory of mind.

In Language and thought: Interdisciplinary themes, ed. P. Carruthers and J. Boucher,270–83. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Pezdek, K., and W. P. Banks, eds. 1996. The recovered memory/false memory debate. SanDiego: Academic Press.

Pezdek, K., and D. Hodge. 1999. Planting false childhood memories in children: Therole of event plausibility. Child Development 70:887–95.

Philip, I. 2001. Ban on religious hate. The Independent (London), October 5, Reviewsection, 2.

Piaget, J. 1972. Intellectual evolution from adolescence to adulthood. HumanDevelopment 15:1–12.

Piattelli-Palmarini, M. 1994. Inevitable illusions: How mistakes of reason rule our minds.

New York: Wiley.

Pinel, J., S. Assanand, and D. R. Lehman. 2000. Hunger, eating, and ill health. AmericanPsychologist 55:1105–16.

Pinker, S. 1994. The language instinct. New York: William Morrow.

———. 1997. How the mind works. New York: Norton.

———. 2002. The blank slate: The modern denial of human nature. New York: Viking.

Piper, A. 1998. Multiple personality disorder: Witchcraft survives in the twentieth century.

Skeptical Inquirer 22, no. 3: 44–50.

Plato. 1945. The republic. Translated by Francis MacDonald Cornford. New York: OxfordUniversity Press.

Plomin, R., J. C. DeFries, G. E. McClearn, and P. McGuffin. 2001. Behavior genetics. 4th ed.

New York: Worth.

Plomin, R., and S. A. Petrill. 1997. Genetics and intelligence: What’s new? Intelligence24:53–77.

Plotkin, H. C. 1988. Behavior and evolution. In The role of behavior in evolution, ed. H. C.

Plotkin, 1–17. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.

———. 1994. Darwin machines and the nature of knowledge. Cambridge, Mass.: HarvardUniversity Press.

———. 1998. Evolution in mind: An introduction to evolutionary psychology. Cambridge,Mass.: Harvard University Press.

Plous, S. 1993. The psychology of judgment and decision making. New York: McGraw-Hill.

Politzer, G., and I. A. Noveck. 1991. Are conjunction rule violations the result of conversationalrule violations? Journal of Psycholinguistic Research 20:83–103.

Pollock, J. L. 1991. OSCAR: A general theory of rationality. In Philosophy and AI: Essaysat the interface, ed. J. Cummins and J. L. Pollock, 189–213. Cambridge, Mass.:MIT Press.

———. Cognitive carpentry: A blueprint for how to build a person. Cambridge, Mass.:MIT Press.

Popper, K. R. 1963. Conjectures and refutations: The growth of scientific knowledge. NewYork: Harper and Row.

Posner, M. I., and C. R. R. Snyder. 1975. Attention and cognitive control. In Informationprocessing and cognition: The Loyola Symposium, ed. R. L. Solso, 55–85. New York:Wiley.

Pratt, J. W., H. Raiffa, and R. Schlaifer. 1995. Introduction to statistical decision theory.

Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.

Purcell, D. G., A. Stewart, and K. E. Stanovich. 1983. Another look at semantic primingwithout awareness. Perception & Psychophysics 34:65–71.

Pylyshyn, Z. 1984. Computation and cognition. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.

Quattrone, G., and A. Tversky. 1984. Causal versus diagnostic contingencies: On selfdeceptionand on the voter’s illusion. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology46:237–48.

Quine, W. 1960. Word and object. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.

Quirk, J. P. 1987. Intermediate microeconomics. 3d ed. Chicago: Science ResearchAssociates.

Radcliffe Richards, J. 2000. Human nature after Darwin: A philosophical introduction.

London: Routledge.

Radnitzky, G., and W. W. Bartley, eds. 1987. Evolutionary epistemology, rationality, and thesociology of knowledge. La Salle, Ill.: Open Court.

Ramachandran, V. S., and S. Blakeslee. 1998. Phantoms in the brain. New York: WilliamMorrow.

Rauch, J. 1993. Kindly inquisitors: The new attacks on free thought. Chicago: University ofChicago Press.

Rawls, J. 1971. A theory of justice. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

———. 2001. Justice as fairness: A restatement. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard UniversityPress.

Raymo, C. 1999. Skeptics and true believers. Toronto: Doubleday Canada.

Real, L. A. 1991. Animal choice behavior and the evolution of cognitive architecture.

Science 253:980–86.

Reber, A. S. 1992a. An evolutionary context for the cognitive unconscious. PhilosophicalPsychology 5:33–51.

———. 1992b. The cognitive unconscious: An evolutionary perspective. Consciousnessand Cognition 1:93–133.

———. 1993. Implicit learning and tacit knowledge. New York: Oxford University Press.

Redelmeier, D. A., E. Shafir, and P. S. Aujla. 2001. The beguiling pursuit of more information.

Medical Decision Making 21, no. 5: 376–81.

Redelmeier, D. A., and A. Tversky. 1990. Discrepancy between medical decisions for individualpatients and for groups. New England Journal of Medicine 322:1162–64.

———. 1992. On the framing of multiple prospects. Psychological Science 3:191–93.

Resnik, M. D. 1987. Choices: An introduction to decision theory. Minneapolis: University ofMinnesota Press.

Rhoads, S. E. 1985. The economist’s view of the world: Government, markets, and public policy.

Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Richardson, H. S. 1997. Practical reasoning about final ends. Cambridge: CambridgeUniversity Press.

Richardson, J. H. 2001. In the little world: A true story of dwarfs, love, and trouble. NewYork: HarperCollins.

Ridley, Mark. 1996. Evolution. 2d ed. Cambridge, Mass.: Blackwell Science.

———. 2000. Mendel’s demon: Gene justice and the complexity of life. London: Weidenfeldand Nicolson.

Ridley, Matt. 1999. Genome: The autobiography of a species in 23 chapters. New York:HarperCollins.

Rips, L. J. 1994. The logic of proof. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.

Rips, L. J., and F. G. Conrad. 1983. Individual differences in deduction. Cognition andBrain Theory 6:259–85.

Roberts, M. J., and E. J. Newton. 2001. Inspection times, the change task, and the rapidresponseselection task. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology 54A:1031–48.

Rode, C., L. Cosmides, W. Hell, and J. Tooby. 1999. When and why do people avoid unknownprobabilities in decisions under uncertainty? Testing some predictions fromoptimal foraging theory. Cognition

72:269–304.

Rodkin, L. I., E. J. Hunt, and S. D. Cowan. 1982. A men’s support group for significantothers of rape victims. Journal of Marital and Family Therapy 8:91–97.

Rorty, R. 1995. Cranes and skyhooks. Lingua Franca, July/August, 62–66.

Rose, M. R. 1991. Evolutionary biology of aging. New York: Oxford University Press.

Rose, S., L. J. Kamin, and R. C. Lewontin. 1984. Not in our genes: Biology, ideology andhuman nature. London: Penguin Books.

Rosenthal, D. 1986. Two concepts of consciousness. Philosophical Studies 49:329–59.

Rozin, P. 1976. The evolution of intelligence and access to the cognitive unconscious.

Progress in Psychobiology and Physiological Psychology 6:245–80.

———. 1996. Towards a psychology of food and eating: From motivation to module tomodel to marker, morality, meaning and metaphor. Current Directions inPsychological Science 5, no. 1: 18–24.

Rozin, P., and A. E. Fallon. 1987. A perspective on disgust. Psychological Review 94:23–41.

Rozin, P., L. Millman, and C. Nemeroff. 1986. Operation of the laws of sympatheticmagic in disgust and other domains. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology50:703–12.

Ruggiero, V. 2000. Bad attitude: Confronting the views that hinder students’ learning.

American Educator 24, no. 2: 10–15.

Rumelhart, D. E., P. Smolensky, J. L. McClelland, and G. E. Hinton. 1986. Schemata andsequential thought processes in PDP models. In Parallel distributed processing:

Explorations in the microstructure of cognition, vol. 2, ed. J. L. McClelland and D. E.

Rumelhart, 7–57. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.

Runciman, W. G. 1998. The selectionist paradigm and its implications for sociology.

Sociology 32:163–88.

Ruse, M. 1998. Taking Darwin seriously. Amherst, N.Y.: Prometheus Books.

Russo, J. E., and P. Schoemaker. 2002. Winning decisions: Getting it right the first time.

New York: Doubleday.

Sá, W., R. F. West, and K. E. Stanovich. 1999. The domain specificity and generality ofbelief bias: Searching for a generalizable critical thinking skill. Journal of EducationalPsychology 91:497–

510.

Sabini, J., and M. Silver. 1998. Emotion, character, and responsibility. New York: OxfordUniversity Press.

Sahlin, N. 1981. Preference among preferences as a method for obtaining a higherorderedmetric scale. British Journal of Mathematical and Statistical Psychology 34:

62–75.

Saks, M. J., and R. F. Kidd. 1980. Human information processing and adjudication: Trialby heuristics. Law and Society 15:123–60.

Samuels, R. 1998. Evolutionary psychology and the massive modularity hypothesis.

British Journal for the Philosophy of Science 49:575–602.

Samuels, R., S. P. Stich, and M. Bishop. 2002. Ending the rationality wars: How to makedisputes about human rationality disappear. In Common sense, reasoning and rationality,ed. R. Elio, 236–68.

New York: Oxford University Press.

Samuels, R., S. P. Stich, and P. D. Tremoulet. 1999. Rethinking rationality: From bleakimplications to Darwinian modules. In What is cognitive science?, ed. E. Lepore andZ. Pylyshyn, 74–120.

Oxford: Blackwell.

Satz, D., and J. Ferejohn. 1994. Rational choice and social theory. Journal of Philosophy91:71–87.

Savage, L. J. 1954. The foundations of statistics. New York: Wiley.

Scanlon, T. M. 1998. What we owe to each other. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard UniversityPress.

Scheffler, I. 1991. In praise of the cognitive emotions. New York: Routledge.

Schelling, T. C. 1984. Choice and consequence: Perspectives of an errant economist.

Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.

Schick, F. 1984. Having reasons: An essay on rationality and sociality. Princeton, N.J.:

Princeton University Press.

———. 1987. Rationality: A third dimension. Economics and Philosophy 3:49–66.

———. 1997. Making choices: A recasting of decision theory. Cambridge: CambridgeUniversity Press.

Schlosser, E. 2001. Fast food nation. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.

Schmidt, F. L., and J. E. Hunter. 1992. Development of a causal model of processesdetermining job performance. Current Directions in Psychological Science 1:89–92.

———. 1998. The validity and utility of selection methods in personnel psychology:

Practical and theoretical implications of 85 years of research findings. PsychologicalBulletin 124:262–74.

Schmidtz, D. 1995. Rational choice and moral agency. Princeton, N.J.: PrincetonUniversity Press.

———, ed. 2002. Robert Nozick. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Schoenfeld, A. H. 1983. Beyond the purely cognitive: Belief systems, social cognitions,and metacognitions as driving forces in intellectual performance. Cognitive Science7:329–63.

Scholl, B. J., and A. M. Leslie. 2001. Minds, modules, and meta-analysis. ChildDevelopment 72:696–701.

Schommer, M. 1990. Effects of beliefs about the nature of knowledge on comprehension.

Journal of Educational Psychology 82:498–504.

———. 1994. Synthesizing epistemological belief research: Tentative understandingsand provocative confusions. Educational Psychology Review 6:293–319.

Schueler, G. F. 1995. Desire: Its role in practical reason and the explanation of action.

Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.

Schustack, M. W., and R. J. Sternberg. 1981. Evaluation of evidence in causal inference.

Journal of Experimental Psychology: General 110:101–20.

Scitovsky, T. 1976. The joyless economy: The psychology of human satisfaction. Oxford:Oxford University Press.

Searle, J. R. 1992. The rediscovery of mind. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.

———. 2001. The rationality of action. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.

Selfridge, O., and U. Neisser. 1960. Pattern recognition by machine. Scientific American203:60–68.

Sen, A. K. 1977. Rational fools: A critique of the behavioral foundations of economictheory. Philosophy and Public Affairs 6:317–44.

———. 1982. Choices, orderings and morality. In A. K. Sen, Choice, welfare and measurement,74–83. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.

———. 1987. On ethics and economics. Oxford: Blackwell.

———. 1993. Internal consistency of choice. Econometrica 61:495–521.

———. 1999. Development as freedom. New York: Knopf.

———. 2002. On the Darwinian view of progress. In A. K. Sen, Rationality and freedom,484–500. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.

Sen, A. K., and B. Williams, eds. 1982. Utilitarianism and beyond. Cambridge: CambridgeUniversity Press.

Sennett, R. 1998. The corrosion of character. New York: Norton.

Shafer, G. 1988. Savage revisited. In Decision making: Descriptive, normative, and prescriptiveinteractions, ed. D. Bell, H. Raiffa, and A. Tversky, 193–234. Cambridge:

Cambridge University Press.

Shafir, E. 1994. Uncertainty and the difficulty of thinking through disjunctions.

Cognition 50:403–30.

Shafir, E., and R. A. LeBoeuf. 2002. Rationality. Annual Review of Psychology 53:491–517.

Shafir, E., and A. Tversky. 1995. Decision making. In Thinking, ed. E. E. Smith andD. N. Osherson, 3:77–100. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.

Shallice, T. 1988. From neuropsychology to mental structure. Cambridge: CambridgeUniversity Press.

———. 1991. Precis of From neuropsychology to mental structure. Behavioral and BrainSciences 14:429–69.

Shanks, D. R. 1995. Is human learning rational? Quarterly Journal of ExperimentalPsychology 48A:257–79.

Shaw, G. B. 1921. Back to Methuselah. London: Constable and Co.

Shawn, W. 1991. The fever. London: Faber and Faber.

Shear, J., ed. 1998. Explaining consciousness—The ‘hard problem.’ Cambridge, Mass.:MIT Press.

Shenk, D. 2001. The forgetting: Alzheimer’s, portrait of an epidemic. New York: Doubleday.

Shepard, R. N. 1987. Evolution of a mesh between principles of the mind and regularitiesof the world. In The latest on the best: Essays on evolution and optimality, ed.

J. Dupre, 251–75. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.

Shermer, M. 1997. Why people believe weird things. New York: W. H. Freeman.

Shiffrin, R. M., and W. Schneider. 1977. Controlled and automatic human informationprocessing: II. Perceptual learning, automatic attending, and a general theory.

Psychological Review 84:127–90.

Shweder, R. A. 1987. Comments on Plott and on Kahneman, Knetsch, and Thaler. InRational choice: The contrast between economics and psychology, ed. R. M. Hogarth andM. W. Reder, 161–70. Chicago:

University of Chicago Press.

Siegel, H. 1988. Educating reason: Rationality, critical thinking, and education. New York:Routledge.

Sigel, I. E. 1993. The centrality of a distancing model for the development of representationalcompetence. In The development and meaning of psychological distance, ed.

R. Cocking and K. Renninger, 141–58. Hillsdale, N.J.: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.

Simms, R. 2002. Saving at Wal-Mart, but paying a price. New York Times, March 3.

Simon, H. A. 1956. Rational choice and the structure of the environment. PsychologicalReview 63:129–38.

———. 1957. Models of man. New York: Wiley.

———. 1967. Motivational and emotional controls of cognition. Psychological Review74:29–39.

———. 1983. Reason in human affairs. Stanford, Calif.: Stanford University Press.

Sinatra, G. M., and P. R. Pintrich, eds. 2003. Intentional conceptual change. Mahwah, N.J.:

Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.

Skyrms, B. 1996. The evolution of the social contract. Cambridge: Cambridge UniversityPress.

Sloman, S. A. 1996. The empirical case for two systems of reasoning. PsychologicalBulletin 119:3–22.

———. 1999. Rational versus arational models of thought. In The nature of cognition, ed.

R. J. Sternberg, 557–85. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.

———. 2002. Two systems of reasoning. In Heuristics and biases: The psychology of intuitivejudgment, ed. T. Gilovich, D. Griffin, and D. Kahneman, 379–96. New York:Cambridge University Press.

Sloman, S. A., D. Over, and J. M. Stibel. 2003. Frequency illusions and other fallacies.

Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 91: 296–309.

Sloman, S. A., and L. J. Rips, eds. 1998. Similarity and symbols in human thinking.

Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.

Slovic, P. 1995. The construction of preference. American Psychologist 50:364–71.

Slovic, P., M. L. Finucane, E. Peters, and D. G. MacGregor. 2002. The affect heuristic. InHeuristics and biases: The psychology of intuitive judgment, ed. T. Gilovich, D. Griffin,and D. Kahneman,

397–420. New York: Cambridge University Press.

Slovic, P., and A. Tversky. 1974. Who accepts Savage’s axiom? Behavioral Science 19:368–73.

Slugoski, B. R., and A. E. Wilson. 1998. Contribution of conversation skills to the productionof judgmental errors. European Journal of Social Psychology 28:575–601.

Smith, E. A., M. Borgerhoff Mulder, and K. Hill. 2001. Controversies in the evolutionarysocial sciences: A guide for the perplexed. Trends in Ecology and Evolution 16:128–35.

Smith, E. E., A. L. Patalino, and J. Jonides. 1998. Alternative strategies of categorization.

In Similarity and symbols in human thinking, ed. S. A. Sloman and L. J. Rips, 81–110.

Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.

Smith, E. R., and J. DeCoster. 2000. Dual-process models in social and cognitive psychology:

Conceptual integration and links to underlying memory systems.

Personality and Social Psychology Review 4:108–31.

Sober, E., and D. S. Wilson. 1998. Unto others: The evolution and psychology of unselfishbehavior. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.

Spanos, N. P. 1996. Multiple identities and false memories: A sociocognitive perspective.

Washington: American Psychological Association.

Speel, H. C. 1995. Memetics: On a conceptual framework for cultural evolution. Paperpresented at the Conference on Einstein meets Magritte, Free University of Brussels,June 1995.

Sperber, D. 1985. Anthropology and psychology: Towards an epidemiology of representations.

Man 20:73–89.

———. 1994. The modularity of thought and the epidemiology of representations. InMapping the mind: Domain specificity in cognition and culture, ed. L. A. Hirschfeld andS. A. Gelman, 39–67.

Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

———. 1996. Explaining culture: A naturalistic approach. Oxford: Blackwell.

———. 2000a. An objection to the memetic approach to culture. In Darwinizing culture:

The status of memetics as a science, ed. R. Aunger, 163–73. Oxford: Oxford UniversityPress.

———, ed. 2000b. Metarepresentations: A multidisciplinary perspective. Oxford: OxfordUniversity Press.

———. 2000c. Metarepresentations in evolutionary perspective. In Metarepresentations: Amultidisciplinary perspective, ed. D. Sperber, 117–37. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Sperber, D., F. Cara, and V. Girotto. 1995. Relevance theory explains the selection task.

Cognition 57:31–95.

Stanovich, K. E. 1989. Implicit philosophies of mind: The dualism scale and its relationshipswith religiosity and belief in extrasensory perception. Journal of Psychology123:5–23.

———. 1990. Concepts in developmental theories of reading skill: Cognitive resources,automaticity, and modularity. Developmental Review 10:72–100.

———. 1993. Dysrationalia: A new specific learning disability. Journal of LearningDisabilities 26:501–15.

———. 1994. Reconceptualizing intelligence: Dysrationalia as an intuition pump.

Educational Researcher 23, no. 4: 11–22.

———. 1999. Who is Rational? Studies of Individual Differences in Reasoning. Mahwah,N.J.: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.

———. 2001. Reductionism in the study of intelligence: Review of「Looking Down onHuman Intelligence」by Ian Dreary. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 5: 91–92.

———. 2003. The fundamental computational biases of human cognition: Heuristicsthat (sometimes) impair reasoning and decision making. In The psychology of problemsolving, ed. J. E. Davidson and

R. J. Sternberg, 291–342. New York: CambridgeUniversity Press.

Stanovich, K. E., A. Cunningham, and R. F. West. 1981. A longitudinal study of the developmentof automatic recognition skills in first graders. Journal of Reading Behavior13:57–74.

Stanovich, K. E., and R. F. West. 1983. On priming by a sentence context. Journal ofExperimental Psychology: General 112:1–36.

———. 1997. Reasoning independently of prior belief and individual differences in activelyopen-minded thinking. Journal of Educational Psychology 89:342–57.

———. 1998a. Cognitive ability and variation in selection task performance. Thinkingand Reasoning 4:193–230.

———. 1998b. Individual differences in framing and conjunction effects. Thinking andReasoning 4:289–317.

———. 1998c. Individual differences in rational thought. Journal of ExperimentalPsychology: General 127:161–88.

———. 1998d. Who uses base rates and P(D/~H)? An analysis of individual differences.

Memory & Cognition 28:161–79.

———. 1999. Discrepancies between normative and descriptive models of decisionmaking and the understanding/acceptance principle. Cognitive Psychology 38:349–85.

———. 2000. Individual differences in reasoning: Implications for the rationality debate?

Behavioral and Brain Sciences 23:645–726.

Starmer, C. 2000. Developments in non-expected utility theory: The hunt for a descriptivetheory of choice under risk. Journal of Economic Literature 38:332–82.

Stein, E. 1996. Without good reason: The rationality debate in philosophy and cognitive science.

Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Steiner, G. 1997. Errata: An examined life. London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson.

Stent, G. S. 1978. Introduction. In Morality as a biological phenomenon, ed. G. S. Stent,1–18. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press.

Sterelny, K. 1990. The representational theory of mind: An introduction. Oxford: Blackwell.

———. 2001a. Dawkins vs. Gould: Survival of the fittest. Duxford, England: Icon Books.

———. 2001b. The evolution of agency and other essays. Cambridge: Cambridge UniversityPress.

Sterelny, K., and P. E. Griffiths. 1999. Sex and death: An introduction to philosophy of biology.

Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Sternberg, R. J., ed. 1982. Handbook of human intelligence. Cambridge: CambridgeUniversity Press.

———. 1988. Mental self-government: A theory of intellectual styles and their development.

Human Development 31:197–224.

———. 1989. Domain-generality versus domain-specificity: The life and impendingdeath of a false dichotomy. Merrill-Palmer Quarterly 35:115–30.

———. 1997a. The concept of intelligence and its role in lifelong learning and success.

American Psychologist 52:1030–37.

———. 1997b. Thinking styles. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

———, ed. 1999. The nature of cognition. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.

———, ed. 2000. Handbook of intelligence. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

———. 2001. Why schools should teach for wisdom: The balance theory of wisdom ineducational settings. Educational Psychologist 36:227–45.

———, ed. 2002. Why smart people can be so stupid. New Haven, Conn.: Yale UniversityPress.

Stich, S. P. 1983. From folk psychology to cognitive science. Cambridge: MIT Press.

———. 1990. The fragmentation of reason. Cambridge: MIT Press.

———. 1996. Deconstruction of the mind. New York: Oxford University Press.

Stolz, J. A., and J. H. Neely. 1995. When target degradation does and does not enhancesemantic context effects in word recognition. Journal of Experimental Psychology:

Learning, Memory and Cognition 21:596–611.

Stone, T., and A. W. Young. 1997. Delusions and brain injury: The philosophy and psychologyof belief. Mind and Language 12:327–64.

Stone, V. E., L. Cosmides, J. Tooby, N. Kroll, and R. T. Knight. 2002. Selective impairmentof reasoning about social exchange in a patient with bilateral limbic systemdamage. Proceedings of the

National Academy of Sciences 99:11531–36.

Stout, M. 2000. The feel-good curriculum: The dumbing down of America’s kids in the name ofself-esteem. Cambridge, Mass.: Perseus Publishing.

Suddendorf, T., and A. Whiten. 2001. Mental evolution and development: Evidence forsecondary representation in children, great apes, and other animals. PsychologicalBulletin 127:629–50.

Sutherland, S. 1992. Irrationality: The enemy within. London: Constable.

Swartz, R. J., and D. N. Perkins. 1989. Teaching thinking: Issues and approaches. PacificGrove, Calif.: Midwest Publications.

Swets, J. A., R. M. Dawes, and J. Monahan. 2000. Psychological science can improvediagnostic decisions. Psychological Science in the Public Interest 1:1–26.

Symons, D. 1992. On the use and misuse of Darwinism in the study of humanbehavior. In The adapted mind, ed. J. Barkow, L. Cosmides, and J. Tooby, 137–59.

New York: Oxford University Press.

Szathmáry, E. 1999. The first replicators. In Levels of selection in evolution, ed. L. Keller,31–52. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.

Taylor, C. 1989. Sources of the self: The making of modern identity. Cambridge, Mass.:Harvard University Press.

———. 1992. The ethics of authenticity. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Tetlock, P. E., and B. A. Mellers. 2002. The great rationality debate. Psychological Science13:94–99.

Thaler, R. H. 1980. Toward a positive theory of consumer choice. Journal of EconomicBehavior and Organization 1:39–60.

———. 1987. The psychology of choice and the assumptions of economics. InLaboratory experimentation in economics: Six points of view, ed. A. E. Roth, 99–130.

Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

———. 1992. The winner’s curse: Paradoxes and anomalies of economic life. New York:Free Press.

Thomas, M., and A. Karmiloff-Smith. 1998. Quo vadis modularity in the 1990s?

Learning and Individual Differences 10:245–50.

Tishman, S., D. N. Perkins, and E. Jay. 1995. The thinking classroom: Learning and teachingin a culture of thinking. Needham, Mass.: Allyn and Bacon.

Todd, P. M., and G. Gigerenzer. 2000. Precis of Simple heuristics that make us smart.

Behavioral and Brain Sciences 23:727–80.

Tomasello, M. 1998. Social cognition and the evolution of culture. In Piaget, evolution,and development, ed. J. Langer and M. Killen, 221–45. Mahwah, N.J.: LawrenceErlbaum Associates.

———. 1999. The cultural origins of human cognition. Cambridge, Mass.: HarvardUniversity Press.

Tooby, J., and Cosmides, L. 1990. On the universality of human nature and the uniquenessof the individual: The role of genetics and adaptation. Journal of Personality58:17–67.

———. 1992. The psychological foundations of culture. In The adapted mind, ed. J.

Barkow, L. Cosmides, and J. Tooby, 19–136. New York: Oxford University Press.

Toplak, M., and K. E. Stanovich. 2002. The domain specificity and generality of disjunctivereasoning: Searching for a generalizable critical thinking skill. Journal ofEducational Psychology 94:197

———. 2003. Associations between myside bias on an informal reasoning task andamount of post-secondary education. Applied Cognitive Psychology 17: 851–60.

Trivers, R. L. 1971. The evolution of reciprocal altruism. Quarterly Review of Biology46:35–57.

———. 1974. Parent-offspring conflict. American Zoologist 14:249–64.

Tsimpli, I., and N. Smith. 1998. Modules and quasi-modules: Language and theory ofmind in a polyglot savant. Learning and Individual Differences 10:193–216.

Turkle, S. 1984. The second self: Computers and the human spirit. New York: Simon andSchuster.

Turner, M. 2001. Cognitive dimensions of social science. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Tversky, A. 1969. Intransitivity of preferences. Psychological Review 76:31–48.

———. 1975. A critique of expected utility theory: Descriptive and normative considerations.

Erkenntnis 9:163–73.

———. 1996a. Contrasting rational and psychological principles of choice. In Wisechoices, ed. R. Zeckhauser, R. Keeney, and J. Sebenius, 5–21. Cambridge, Mass.:Harvard Business School Press.

———. 1996b. Rational theory and constructive choice. In The rational foundations ofeconomic behaviour, ed. K. J. Arrow, E. Colombatto, M. Perlman, and C. Schmidt,185–97. London: Macmillan.

Tversky, A., and W. Edwards. 1966. Information versus reward in binary choice. Journalof Experimental Psychology 71:680–83.

Tversky, A., and D. Kahneman. 1973. Availability: A heuristic for judging frequency andprobability. Cognitive Psychology 5:207–32.

———. 1974. Judgment under uncertainty: Heuristics and biases. Science 185:1124–31.

———. 1981. The framing of decisions and the psychology of choice. Science 211:453–58.

———. 1982. Evidential impact of base rates. In Judgment under uncertainty: Heuristicsand biases, ed. D. Kahneman, P. Slovic, and A. Tversky, 153–60. Cambridge:

Cambridge University Press.

———. 1983. Extensional versus intuitive reasoning: The conjunction fallacy in probabilityjudgment. Psychological Review 90:293–315.

———. 1986. Rational choice and the framing of decisions. Journal of Business 59:251–78.

Tversky, A., S. Sattath, and P. Slovic. 1988. Contingent weighting in judgment andchoice. Psychological Review 95:371–84.

Tversky, A., and E. Shafir. 1992. The disjunction effect in choice under uncertainty.

Psychological Science 3:305–9.

Tversky, A., P. Slovic, and D. Kahneman. 1990. The causes of preference reversal.

American Economic Review 80:204–17.

Tversky, A., and R. H. Thaler. 1990. Anomalies: Preference reversals. Journal of EconomicPerspectives 4:201–11.

Uchitelle, L. 2002. Why it takes psychology to make people save. New York Times,January 13.

Uleman, J. S., and J. A. Bargh, eds. 1989. Unintended thought. New York: Guilford Press.

Velleman, J. D. 1992. What happens when somebody acts? Mind 101:461–81.

Vernon, P. A. 1991. The use of biological measures to estimate behavioral intelligence.

Educational Psychologist 25:293–304.

———. 1993. Biological approaches to the study of human intelligence. Norwood, N.J.:

Ablex.

von Neumann, J., and O. Morgenstern. 1944. The theory of games and economic behavior.

Princeton, N. J.: Princeton University Press.

Vranas, P. B. M. 2000. Gigerenzer’s normative critique of Kahneman and Tversky.

Cognition 76:179–93.

Wason, P. C. 1966. Reasoning. In New horizons in psychology, ed. B. Foss, 135–51.

Harmondsworth, England: Penguin.

———. 1968. Reasoning about a rule. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology20:273–81.

Wasserman, E. A., W. W. Dorner, and S. F. Kao. 1990. Contributions of specific cell informationto judgments of interevent contingency. Journal of Experimental Psychology:

Learning, Memory, and Cognition 16:509–21.

Watson, G. 1975. Free agency. Journal of Philosophy 72:205–20.

Weber, M. 1968. Economy and society. New York: Bedminster Press.

Wegner, D. M. 2002. The illusion of conscious will. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.

Wegner, D. M., and T. Wheatley. 1999. Apparent mental causation: Sources of the experienceof will. American Psychologist 54:480–92.

Weiskrantz, L. 1986. Blindsight: A case study and implications. Oxford: Oxford UniversityPress.

———. 1995. Blindsight: Not an island unto itself. Current Directions in PsychologicalScience 4:146–51.

Welch, D. A. 2002. Decisions, decisions: The art of effective decision making. Amherst, N.Y.:

Prometheus Books.

Wellman, H. M. 1990. The child’s theory of mind. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.

West, R. L. 1996. An application of prefrontal cortex function theory to cognitive aging.

Psychological Bulletin 120:272–92.

West, R. F., and K. E. Stanovich. 2003. Is probability matching smart? Associations betweenprobabilistic choices and cognitive ability. Memory & Cognition 31:243–51.

Wetherick, N. E. 1993. Human rationality. In Rationality: Psychological and philosophicalperspectives, ed. K. Manktelow and D. Over, 83–109. London: Routledge.

———. 1995. Reasoning and rationality: A critique of some experimental paradigms.

Theory & Psychology 5:429–48.

Whiten, A. 2001. Meta-representation and secondary representation. Trends in CognitiveSciences 5:378.

Whiten, A., and R. W. Byrne, eds. 1997. Machiavellian intelligence II: Extensions and evaluations.

Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Wilkes, K. V. 1988. Real people: Personal identity without thought experiments. Oxford:Oxford University Press.

Williams, G. C. 1957. Pleiotropy, natural selection, and the evolution of senescence.

Evolution 11:398–411.

———. 1966. Adaptation and natural selection. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton UniversityPress.

———. 1985. A defense of reductionism in evolutionary biology. Oxford Surveys inEvolutionary Biology 2:1–27.

———. 1988. Huxley’s Evolution and ethics in sociobiological perspective. Zygon 23:

———. 1992. Natural selection: Domains, levels and challenges. Oxford: Oxford UniversityPress.

———. 1996. Plan and purpose in nature. London: Phoenix Paperbacks.

Williams, W., T. Blythe, N. White, J. Li, R. J. Sternberg, and H. Gardner. 1996. Practicalintelligence in school. New York: HarperCollins.

Willingham, D. B. 1998. A neuropsychological theory of motor-skill learning.

Psychological Review 105:558–84.

———. 1999. The neural basis of motor-skill learning. Current Directions in PsychologicalScience 8:178–82.

Wilson, D. S. 1994. Adaptive genetic variation and human evolutionary psychology.

Ethology and Sociobiology 15:219–35.

———. 2002. Darwin’s cathedral. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Wilson, E. O. 1978. On human nature. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.

Wilson, M. 2002. Six views of embodied cognition. Psychonomic Bulletin and Review9:625–36.

Wilson, M., and M. Daly. 1992. The man who mistook his wife for a chattel. In Theadapted mind, ed. J. Barkow, L. Cosmides, and J. Tooby, 289–322. New York: OxfordUniversity Press.

Wilson, R. A., and F. C. Keil, eds. 1999. The MIT encyclopedia of the cognitive sciences.

Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.

Wilson, T. D. 2002. Strangers to ourselves. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.

Wilson, T. D., and N. Brekke. 1994. Mental contamination and mental correction:

Unwanted influences on judgments and evaluations. Psychological Bulletin116:117–42.

Wilson, T. D., and J. W. Schooler. 1991. Thinking too much: Introspection can reducethe quality of preferences and decisions. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology60:181–92.

Wolfe, A. 1989. Whose keeper? Social science and moral obligation. Berkeley and LosAngeles: University of California Press.

Wolford, G., M. B. Miller, and M. S. Gazzaniga. 2000. The left hemisphere’s role inhypothesis formation. Journal of Neuroscience 20 (RC64): 1–4.

Wright, R. 1994. The moral animal: Evolutionary psychology and everyday life. New York:Vintage Books.

Yang, Y., and P. N. Johnson-Laird. 2000. Illusions in quantified reasoning: How to makethe impossible seem possible, and vice versa. Memory & Cognition 28:452–65.

Yates, J. F., ed. 1992. Risk-taking behavior. Chichester, England: Wiley.

Young, A. W. 2000. Wondrous strange: The neuropsychology of abnormal beliefs. InPathologies of belief, ed. M. Coltheart and M. Davies, 47–73. Oxford: Blackwell.

Zajonc, R. B. 2001. Mere exposure: A gateway to the subliminal. Current Directions inPsychological Science 10:224–28.

Zajonc, R. B., and H. Markus. 1982. Affective and cognitive factors in preferences. Journalof Consumer Research 9:123–31.

Zelazo, P. D., J. W. Astington, and D. R. Olson, eds. 1999. Developing theories of intention.

Mahwah, N.J.: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.

Zelazo, P. D., and D. Frye. 1998. Cognitive complexity and control: II. The developmentof executive function in childhood. Current Directions in Psychological Science7:121–26.

Zimmerman, D. 1981. Hierarchical motivation and freedom of the will. PacificPhilosophical Quarterly 62:354–68.

如果你不知道读什么书，

就关注这个微信号。

微信公众号名称：幸福的味道

加小编微信一起读书

小编微信号：2338856113

【幸福的味道】已提供 200 个不同类型的书单

1、 历届茅盾文学奖获奖作品

2、 每年豆瓣，当当，亚马逊年度图书销售排行榜

3、 25 岁前一定要读的 25 本书

4、 有生之年，你一定要看的 25 部外国纯文学名著

5、 有生之年，你一定要看的 20 部中国现当代名著

6、 美国亚马逊编辑推荐的一生必读书单 100 本

7、 30 个领域 30 本不容错过的入门书

8、 这 20 本书，是各领域的巅峰之作

9、 这 7 本书，教你如何高效读书

10、 80 万书虫力荐的「给五星都不够」的 30 本书

……

关注「幸福的味道」微信公众号，即可查看对应书单和得到电子书

也可以在我的网站（周读） www.ireadweek.com 这行下载

