# 0601. Visceral

I AWOKE ABRUPTLY WHEN Susan pushed me roughly away from her shoulder, where my head had been resting. The embarrassment I felt intensified when I saw that a thin line of drool had escaped my mouth and was hanging on to Susan's sleeve. My hand came up sharply to gather it up, but I couldn't look Susan in the face to apologize, so instead I pretended I was still asleep. I slumped my head over to the other side of my seat and tried to nuzzle it into the gap between the hard polypropylene cabin wall and the acrylic seat cover. It was uncomfortable, awkward, and a little painful, but I felt I deserved this punishment. I was wide awake now, with my eyes screwed shut. How long would I have to do this before we could both legitimately pretend to forget what had happened? Was this the most embarrassing thing that had ever happened to me? No. But it was definitely up there with wetting myself at school, being explosively sick while running through a packed restaurant on the way to the toilet, and watching my grandfather sneeze over my soup just as it had been served. I replay these horror scenes from my life at regular intervals; their intensity never seems to dim. Why is it that bodily fluids are so charged with emotion? Even the term「bodily fluids」makes me uncomfortable. So many of our manners and customs are concerned with keeping our bodies' excretions in check. And yet without them we'd be in serious trouble. They are essential to our well-being when they're still inside our bodies — so why are they so loaded with disgust as soon as they leave?

「Sir, would you like the chicken curry or the pasta?」

The meal was being served. I swiveled around in my chair, pretending to have just woken up, exaggerating a groggy demeanor.

「Huh? Sorry, what?」

「Would you like the chicken curry or the pasta?」

「Er, the chicken curry. Thank you,」I said hurriedly, twisting the toggle that secured my tray table.

I had not made eye contact with Susan since drooling on her, but I instinctively felt that the meal might draw a line under the episode: we both needed our saliva now.

A typical airline lunch.

I picked up the bread roll from the tray that had been placed in front of me and took a bite. It was soft, but a bit dry. Fortunately, the act of chewing the bread made it wet, thanks to my salivary glands, which had leapt into action, producing liquid that not only coated the bread, keeping it from sticking to the roof of my mouth, but also extracted its flavor. I tasted sweetness first, as my saliva dissolved the bread's sugars and delivered them to my sweet taste buds; then the bread's salty and savory qualities came through.

Taste buds require that a liquid medium deliver flavor molecules to them, which is exactly what saliva has evolved to do. Bread doesn't have its own juice, so you need saliva to enjoy it — indeed, to eat it at all. But your saliva doesn't just dissolve flavors; it also helps your gustatory system determine whether the food you're eating is nutritious, and it raises the alarm if the food contains pathogens or poisons. There are enzymes in your saliva that predigest the food, so your taste buds, and indeed your nasal receptors, can analyze what's in your mouth before you swallow. Amylase is one of the most important; it breaks down starch and turns it into simple sugars, which is why bread tastes sweeter the longer you chew it. The amylase continues to break down the carbohydrates long after you've swallowed, and it continues picking apart whatever small fragments remain in your mouth or got stuck between your teeth.

Saliva also controls the pH of your mouth, actively trying to keep it neutral. The pH scale describes the acidity or alkalinity of a liquid. The scale goes from 0 to 14, with 0 being the most acidic and 14 being the most alkaline. Pure water is neutral and has a pH of 7. Acidic liquids often taste sour, like lemon juice, for instance, which has a pH of 2. Most drinks are acidic, including orange juice and apple juice and even milk; they don't all taste sour because many also contain sugars, which help balance out the flavor profile (Coke-type beverages typically have a pH of 2.5, but the sugar in them makes them quite sweet).

A lot of the bacteria in your mouth feed on sugars and produce acid, which attacks the enamel on your teeth, giving you cavities. Which is why dentists are always telling you to eat less sugar. Saliva, though, constantly washes the bacteria away, restoring the pH of your mouth to neutral. Saliva also contains calcium, phosphate, and fluoride in a super-saturated state, which are deposited on the enamel of your teeth to repair them. Saliva contains proteins that coat the enamel, fending off acids; antibacterial compounds that kill bacteria; pain-killing compounds to soothe toothache; and other components that help clean and heal all the small cuts you get in your mouth while you're eating. In other words, your saliva is the original dental hygiene treatment, and for most other animals it's the only one. And it doesn't just protect your teeth and gums; it also keeps away halitosis (bad breath), which is caused by bacterial colonies growing at the back of your tongue.

The regular flow of saliva from your glands is constantly washing and cleaning out your mouth. To get a sense of just how much saliva you produce, go to the dentist. During treatment, a saliva-sucking machine will be placed in your mouth to get the saliva out of the way while work is done on your teeth. Your salivary glands don't take kindly to the interference, though, and replace your saliva almost as fast as it's sucked away. The average person produces about one quart of this extraordinary liquid per day.

Salivary glands are common to many species and have been evolving in animals for millions of years, for myriad different purposes: snakes have them, to produce venom; fly larvae have them, to produce silk; mosquitos have them, and while they're sucking your blood, they use them to inject you with chemicals that keep your blood from clotting. Some birds use saliva to glue together their nests; in fact, there are swallows, such as the black-nest swiftlet, which make their nest solely from solidified saliva — the main ingredient in bird's-nest soup, a Chinese delicacy.

Which brings us back to eating. Obviously, for humans, one of the main roles of saliva is to wet your food so it will slip and flow, allowing you to swallow it. Without that lubrication, things get very tricky indeed; this is perfectly illustrated in a cracker-eating competition. If you've never tried this, have a go at trying to eat as many crackers as you can in a minute without drinking water. For most people, dry crackers absorb so much of their saliva that, after just one, eating a second will scratch up their mouth, and they'll hardly be able to swallow the dry, crumbly mixture. But saliva isn't our only means of addressing the extreme dryness of some foods. This is why we often drink liquids with food. It is also why we spread fats, like butter, mayonnaise, oil, or margarine, onto dry foods: to act as a lubricant.

Most of us have enough saliva to eat whatever food we want, but some people suffer from「dry mouth,」a condition that prevents the adequate production of saliva. Dry mouth can be caused by disease, but more often than not it's brought on as a side effect of a medication. It can be extremely debilitating, at times making it impossible for patients to eat solid foods at all. You can also get temporary dry mouth when you're experiencing stress and anxiety; if you're afraid of public speaking, you might have felt this while you were giving a speech — your salivary glands will slow their production, your throat will feel dry, and swallowing, even speaking, will become very difficult. You may notice that you're swallowing saliva as you're reading this; this is a common response, and it just highlights how your salivary system is closely linked to your nervous system.

Given the surfeit of saliva that dentists extract from patients' mouths, you'd think it could be treated, as blood is, and donated to patients suffering from dry mouth. But people don't want other people's saliva; it's a goo that actively repulses us — even sharing someone's drink, and the possibility of ingesting a tiny bit of their saliva, is disgusting to many. Disgust isn't the only problem with harvesting saliva, though. Saliva decomposes rapidly once it's outside the body, losing many of the properties that make it so vital. So, instead of saliva transfers, pharmaceutical companies make artificial saliva, composed primarily of minerals that protect against tooth decay, buffering compounds that control the mouth's pH, and lubricants that help to wet food, so you can swallow more easily. Artificial saliva comes in gels, sprays, and liquids. Once a loved one has used these products, or you've done so yourself, you truly start to value your salivary glands.

My own saliva had allowed me to eat my slightly dry dinner roll, which had whetted my appetite, so I turned my attention to the tiny bowl of salad on my tray. It had slices of tomato that looked a bit too big compared to the diced cucumber and shredded iceberg lettuce. The whole thing looked a bit dry and unappetizing. A small packet of dressing accompanied the salad. I tried to tear it open, succeeding only after a disproportionate struggle. The beige vinaigrette that I finally squeezed out of the packet was so viscous that it didn't coat the salad evenly, but rather sat in blobs on the tomato and lettuce, like little slugs. It turned my stomach a bit. A lot of food can be quite disgusting if you think about it out of context, which was exactly what I was doing at that moment.

Revulsion toward food is quite rare for me now, but it regularly occurred when I was a kid, and the vinaigrette slugs took me right back to those days. When I was young, my mother insisted that I eat whatever was put in front of me, and when I refused she would cite statistics about global starvation, telling me just how many people would kill for the food I was currently rejecting. This didn't help. It was disgust I was feeling, and disgust is instinctual. Rational arguments are not effective against it, as I would constantly remind her, but that got me nowhere. In general, disgust overrides moral argument, and I remember the retching feeling in my throat that came when I tried, or was forced, to eat food that repelled me. Much of what I found disgusting as a child was slimy, exactly like the salad dressing in front of me now: stuff that gloops and glops and slides and slithers. This property of liquids is called viscoelasticity: when liquids behave like solids for short periods of time, while still behaving like liquids for longer ones. This is why you can pick up slime and hold it between your fingers, which can't be done with normal liquids. Slime has solidity to it; you can feel it elastically resisting the pressure of your hands, and while most liquids fall apart, the whole piece of slime sticks together. But then, as you continue to hold it, the slime starts to flow and drip down your hand; this flow is what puts the「viscous」in「viscoelastic.」 Hair gel behaves like this — you can pick it up in your hand, but it will also flow, albeit quite slowly. Thick shampoos and toothpaste are also viscoelastic. For whatever reason, in the context of personal grooming we don't find this quality so disgusting — perhaps because we don't eat any of these liquids.

It's the drippy, gloopy nature of slime that makes it disgusting — but why? Perhaps because it reminds us of our internal liquids, and their presence outside the body could signal a threat to our own health. Poo in its liquid state is disgusting, especially if you happen to stand in it, unsuspectingly, in bare feet, and feel it squishing and squirting through your toes. In contrast, a hard turd, especially from an animal like a sheep or a cow, is hardly worrying at all. Snot, in its slimy green form, is disgusting, and anyone who eats it really disgusts us. A child, however cute, with green, wet snot streaming from the nose is repellent to everyone but the parents — and even they don't usually love dealing with their kid's runny nose. It was this, actually, the snotlike nature of the salad dressing, that was repelling me now; I decided not to eat it.

But as gross as it may be, the viscoelasticity of saliva hints at some inner sophistication in its structure. One of the most important families of molecules in saliva is made up of mucins — large protein molecules most often secreted by mucous membranes. Mucus is a slimy coating that your body produces as a protective layer in places where you may be exposed to external foreign particles, toxins, and pathogens — namely, your nose, lungs, and eyes. It's the sticky stuff that streams out of your nose when you're exposed to smoke, or builds up in your eyes when dust flies into them. Mucus is sticky because the mucin proteins form a linear molecule that has many functional components, which stand ready to chemically bond to other things. In other words, it's sticky like resin glues are sticky.

The structure of mucins, showing how their different functional components (illustrated by squares, circles, and triangles) can create a viscoelastic network that traps water to produce slimy, sticky gels.

The mucous system isn't always great, of course. Just look at what happens when you get a cold or other infection, and snot and green phlegm build up in your throat. Mucin molecules are hydrophilic, which means that they are attracted to water. They also bond to one another, creating a network of long molecules that trap water between them. This is a gel — but a viscoelastic one. The phlegm has solidity due to the mucin bonds, but because the mucin network is easily rearranged into a new structure, it flows as a liquid. In doing so, the large mucins align themselves in the direction of flow, which is why, when you drool, your saliva sticks together in long strings. Its ability to stick together, but still to flow, is what gives saliva its important lubricating qualities. Snails and slugs produce a very similar substance, which allows them to move; their mucin-loaded slime lubricates their way around the world, leaving behind little trails wherever they go. Although many people find this disgusting, as they do many slimes, snail slime is quite similar to human saliva. In fact, it is now collected and sold as a face cream. The beneficial effects of smearing snail slime on the face are as yet unproven, but this does not seem to have put off those buying it.

You might have noticed that the viscoelasticity of your saliva changes in texture throughout the day, and depending on whether you're eating, drinking, or feeling healthy or ill. Sometimes your spit is watery and very runny, and at other times it's drooly and stringy. There are, in fact, many more ways it can change in consistency, depending on which glands are producing it. Your salivary glands are controlled by your autonomic nervous system, which is responsible for regulating your unconscious actions. Salivating is one of them. There are two parts to the autonomic nervous system: the sympathetic nervous system and the parasympathetic nervous system. The parasympathetic nervous system is in charge of getting you fed properly, and produces watery saliva while you're eating. Your sympathetic nervous system takes over after eating, and helps keep your mouth lubricated and fighting infection and decay, even when you're sleeping. The saliva produced by your sympathetic nervous system has a different composition and microstructure, and as a result is thicker and stringier. It's the kind of saliva that I had unintentionally drooled onto Susan. I had a quick look at her out of the corner of my eye, without moving my head in her direction, to see if I could gauge her mood. She was eating her pasta without any obvious emotion.

I felt it was time I paid similar attention to my chicken curry. I popped a piece of it into my mouth. Something about the size of the forkful and the amount of sauce caused me to get curry on my chin. I don't know why this always happens to me, but if I'm eating sauced food and don't constantly wipe the outside of my mouth, my face gets covered. This, I am assured by others, including my nearest and dearest, is disgusting. In truth, I find it disgusting in others, so I don't know why I'm so surprised at how much it revolts other people to see me do it. It seems to be a societal norm​ —  having food outside your mouth is disgusting; but if the food has already been partially chewed, it's even worse. If it's mixed with saliva, or if saliva is dripping out of your mouth while you're eating, it's awful. Happily for my fellow travelers, not only do I assiduously use napkins while I'm eating, I'm not a dribbler.

Eating food is a social experience, and because the process of eating is never too far removed from feelings of disgust, table manners are incredibly important in most cultures. Babies and small children eat in a disgusting way. They lack both the coordination to get the food successfully and neatly into their mouth and the self-discipline to keep from spitting it out again, or throwing it onto the table, or the floor, or anywhere, in fact, including over their parents. One of the basic rules of our society is that we eat in an orderly manner; specifically, we don't regurgitate our food, or drool, or eat with our mouth open. So strong is the taboo associated with these behaviors that even the most savage of criminals, or the most degenerate of slobs, still generally adhere to this social norm. It's only the truly mad, deranged, or ill who defy it.

So I did my best to eat the chicken curry neatly. Soon I noticed that my forehead was getting a little sweaty. This often happens to me when I'm eating curries. The chili in the curry contains a molecule called capsaicin, which binds strongly to the receptors in the mouth that signal heat and danger. This is why eating spicy foods can produce a burning sensation in your mouth, even if the food isn't, in terms of temperature, very hot. As your mouth overheats, it's a common response for your body to try to cool you down by sweating, as I was now. Sweat is another bodily fluid that elicits disgust in others, although this is often circumstantial. If sweat starts showing through your clothes, even if you don't smell bad, you're often regarded with disgust. Having someone sitting next to you on a plane who is sweating profusely would most likely fall into this category. In contrast, sweating during sex is accepted, and in most modern societies it is thought to increase sexiness.

The University of Texas recently did a study that looked at the experience of disgust in a number of participants, using a three-domain scale: pathogen disgust, sexual disgust, and moral disgust (there being sufficient evidence that these distinct types of disgust actually do exist). To assess the level of pathogen disgust in participants, the researchers asked them questions about what their responses would be to seeing「mold on leftovers in the refrigerator, or to being presented with novel and unfamiliar foods.」They assessed sexual disgust by asking the participants how they'd feel about different forms of sexual experimentation, or about having casual sex with different partners. Moral disgust was assessed by asking them how they felt about students cheating on exams to obtain better grades, or companies lying to improve profits, or other similar situations.

Ultimately, the researchers found that people who were more likely to try new and unexpected culinary experiences had a higher threshold for sexual disgust too. In fact, over all, they found that the men involved in the study had a statistically significant correlation between their mating strategies and their desire and ability to eat new and unfamiliar foods. The researchers hypothesize that men lower their disgust at particular foods in order to impress potential partners, a means of proving that they're healthy and have a strong immune system, and thus would make suitable sexual partners. In other words, eating disgusting foods could be a mating ritual, of sorts. This rings true. We know that people usually feel disgust when they see saliva, but that disgust seems to be quelled when we're sexually attracted to someone. The sloppy kiss of an aging aunt who insists on a peck on the lips — and has to clamp her hands on our face to stop us from drawing back in horror — is disgusting. But the exchange of saliva during a tongue-licking, passionate kiss with a lover is an obsessive, compulsive, wet, and visceral experience. If you felt disgust at that wetness, you'd be in real trouble from a reproductive standpoint, because lubrication during sex is important. That the same fluids that allow us to have sex are, in other circumstances, disgusting tells you something about just how much the prospect of sex reduces our resistance to bodily fluids.

All that being said, I was pretty sure that there was no way my chicken curry, or the way in which I ate it, could have been construed by Susan as some sort of mating display. I wiped the last residues of the sauce from my chin and the corners of my mouth, and then turned to the small tub of dessert on my tray. Lemon mousse — a good choice for a palate cleanser, I thought. But only if it's lemony enough. When our taste buds detect sourness, they stimulate our salivary glands, which then produce more saliva in an attempt to balance the pH of the mouth. This, in turn, should have the effect of washing out any lingering strong tastes, like the spices and garlic from the curry I just ate. But if the lemon mousse isn't lemony enough, I'd still be able to taste the curry while I ate it, which wouldn't be very appetizing. Happily, it had a lovely, light, foamy texture, and a strong lemon flavor, which was extremely pleasing.

Eating is more than just an exercise in gaining sustenance, more than a social ritual, and more than a mating display — it's also an emotional experience. Perhaps this has to do with the hormones that are released as we're digesting a satisfying meal, which encourage feelings of well-being, or even bliss. It's a bliss that seems to rise up from my stomach whenever I eat something good. It can even bring a tear to my eye.

We don't view tears with disgust in our society, even though they contain many of the same ingredients that make up saliva — mucins, minerals, and oils, to start. There are three sorts of tears: basal tears, reflex tears, and psychic tears. Basal tears are sort of the foundation of tears; they perform the basic function of keeping our eyes from drying out, lubricating our eyelids when we blink, and washing dust away. They also fight bacterial infection. Reflex tears wash away the many types of irritants our eyes encounter on a day-to-day basis, like smoke and dust. And psychic tears are the emotional sort, the kind you might shed after a great meal, as you're listening to sublime music, or while you're being told that your relationship is over. These tears have a chemical makeup distinct from that of basal tears or reflex tears; they contain stress hormones. The purpose of these hormones is not clear, but it most likely has to do with our desire to communicate with and get support from other people. The sight of someone crying usually elicits sympathy and the desire to comfort. Double-blind studies have shown that when men smell women's tears, it lowers their testosterone levels, and they find it less easy to become aroused.

Not that everything is about sex. But when it comes to bodily fluids, sex is never far away. Hence Susan's disgust at a stranger drooling on her.

「Are you finished with that, sir?」the flight attendant asked. He was standing by his trolley and pointed at my tray.

I handed my tray to him over Susan's lap, trying to do so in the most apologetic way possible without actually saying anything or making eye contact. It involved kind of holding the tray out to the attendant while bowing my head through my outstretched arms.