# 0201. Intoxicating

BY THE TIME WE were at cruising altitude — forty thousand feet — I was really enjoying myself, looking down from my window seat onto a layer of clouds, with the sun streaming over them into the cabin. I turned my head to the side and met my neighbor's gaze as she peered out the window too.

「It would be great to jump out now, wouldn't it, and dive into those big, fluffy, warm clouds,」I said.

「They're not warm,」she said.

「Er, no. You're right,」I said.「I'm sorry.」

Oh my God, did I really say that? I thought. Could it be the wine? Had it gone to my head already? I inspected the label of my miniature green-plastic bottle, which declared that the liquid I was drinking was a wine from Australia made from Chardonnay grapes. It was described as「full-bodied, with a vanilla buttery finish.」I took a sip to see if I could taste the vanilla. I couldn't. There was acidity there, and something floral. I inspected the label again. The wine was 13 percent alcohol.

Alcohols are chemically similar to kerosene: for a start, they burn, as you will have witnessed if you've ever ordered a flambé dessert. Usually brandy is used for fancy dishes like that because this spirit has a high percentage of alcohol, typically 40 percent; and this is what burns with a bluish flame on top of your dessert.

Pure alcohol is easy to burn too and indeed is used as a fuel for cars. Brazil is the primary producer of alcohol made from sugarcane, which it uses as a transport fuel. The country is considered to have one of the most sustainable biofuel economies in the world, with some proportion of alcohol being used to fuel 94 percent of Brazilian passenger vehicles. This alcohol is made by turning sugarcane into juice and fermenting that with yeast. This is the same process by which both wine and beer are made: yeast consumes sugar and produces alcohol. But with biofuels the alcohol is then refined into pure alcohol. Biofuel isn't as popular in other parts of the world as it is in Brazil in part because other fossil fuels are much cheaper to produce, but also because it requires lots of land to produce crops that yield alcohol at the scale needed to sustain the transport systems of whole countries. So, worldwide, these crops are mostly grown to produce alcohol for drinking.

Alcohol is a key component of some of the world's most popular drinks, such as wine, beer, and spirits, but it is toxic. It is that toxicity that makes these drinks so intoxicating. That's where the word comes from. The toxins in alcohol suppress the nervous system, causing a loss of cognitive functions, loss of motor functions, and loss of control. It is quite surprising that despite these serious physiological effects, mild intoxication is so very enjoyable. In my case it causes me to become less uptight, to worry less, to grin; and, at higher doses, to dance badly without inhibition. Indeed, nothing quite hits the spot like an intoxicating drink at the end of a long week at work.「Drink me,」a bottle of wine says,「and for a while the world won't be the same.」

A comparison of the chemical structure of methanol and ethanol — both are alcohols. Methanol has one carbon atom, while ethanol has two. Both are polar molecules containing a hydroxyl group — the OH at the end. Water is also polar, and this similarity allows both methanol and ethanol to mix well with it.

Alcohol is a general name for a family of hydrocarbon molecules similar to gasoline and diesel, but with an extra hydrogen atom and oxygen atom attached to them. Those extra atoms are called a hydroxyl group. Different kinds of alcohols come in different molecular sizes: the alcohol we drink has two carbon atoms and is called ethanol. It is a polar molecule, which means that there is a separation of a molecule's electric charge. In the case of alcohols, this is caused by the hydroxyl group. Water molecules also have a hydroxyl group and are also polar. This similarity is why ethanol dissolves in water. When the label on a bottle says what percentage of the drink is alcohol, it's telling you how much dissolved ethanol you're about to consume. In the case of the Chardonnay I was sipping, the answer was 13 percent.

Whereas one side of an alcohol molecule is similar to water, the other side, the hydrocarbon backbone, is similar to the structure of oils and the fatty molecules that coat the cells in your body. It is this similarity that allows ethanol to bypass the defenses of cell membranes and, being small, to sneak through the stomach's cell wall and enter your bloodstream directly. Approximately 20 percent of the ethanol you imbibe when you drink wine goes through your stomach wall and directly into your bloodstream, which is why you can feel the effects of alcohol almost immediately after drinking it.

This could explain my ludicrous remark to Susan, I thought, and quickly glanced her way to see if she seemed annoyed. Still wearing those red-rimmed glasses, she was engrossed in her novel. She had gray, close-cropped hair and wore a black T-shirt. Midfifties, I estimated her age to be. There were a few loose strands of hair, much longer than her own, on her T-shirt. Were they her lover's hair, I wondered, deposited there as they hugged goodbye at the airport? Or maybe they were from her dog.

Dogs also get drunk if they drink alcohol, which is why there is a growing market for non-alcoholic wine designed specifically for pets to consume at festive occasions. Non-alcoholic wine for human consumption is also available, although in my experience it bears very little resemblance to wine. What it does do, however, is highlight quite how much the regular wines rely on alcohol to balance the sweetness and fruitiness of the grape juice. It's what gives wine its air of sophistication and authority. Alcohol turns grape juice into an adult drink — a poison, admittedly, but one whose charms we willingly submit to.

I was already feeling a little intoxicated, but because I had not eaten anything for a while, I was about to become more so. Without food to slow down the progress of the alcohol through my stomach, it was now making its way to my small intestine. Here it entered my bloodstream and then encountered my liver. The liver's job is to get rid of the toxin, but it can metabolize ethanol at a rate of only about one glass of wine per hour (depending on your size). If you drink faster than this, ethanol will enter your bloodstream at a greater rate than it can be processed, and so will be able to infiltrate the rest of your organs, exerting its powers throughout your body. The effects of alcohol on the brain, for instance, are not uniform from person to person. They change, depending on how much you drink, your mental state, and other details of your physiology. But basically, alcohol depresses your nervous system, reduces inhibitions, and changes your mood.

Alcohol affects other organs too. It temporarily weakens the heart muscles, causing them to beat less vigorously and lowering your blood pressure. When blood circulates to your lungs to pick up oxygen from your breath, some of the alcohol jumps across the membranes along with the carbon dioxide being expelled from your blood. As you breathe out, the alcohol vapor becomes part of your exhale, which is why you can smell it when someone's been drinking. Testing for the presence of alcohol vapor in someone's breath is the principle behind the Breathalyzer, which the police use to test whether someone they suspect of drunk driving is, in fact, intoxicated.

While booze on the breath doesn't smell great, the other side of ethanol, the part that's more similar to oil than it is to water, gives us a considerably more fragrant liquid — perfume. Essential oils distilled from plants like bergamot and orange, or resins like myrrh, or animal-derived substances like musk, can all be dissolved in alcohol and turned into perfume. When you dab the perfume on your warm skin, the alcohol evaporates, leaving the oils to diffuse slowly into the air, shrouding you in the scent of your choosing. All the perfumes piled high in the departure lounges of airports are full of alcohol. If you were really desperate to get drunk, you could drink them; they'll have the same effect on you as vodka. But you have to be careful — some of the alcohols used in cheap perfumes contain methanol.

Methanol is the smallest alcohol molecule, with only one carbon atom, unlike ethanol, which has two. This small difference changes its pharmacological activity dramatically and makes methanol far more poisonous than ethanol. One shot glass of pure methanol can cause permanent blindness; three will kill you. This happens because once the methanol is in your body, your digestive system metabolizes it into formic acid and formaldehyde. Formic acid attacks nerve cells, especially the optic nerve. If you drink too much of it, the degradation of your optic nerve could leave you blind — this is where the expression「blind drunk」comes from. The formic acid also goes after your kidneys and liver, where it causes permanent damage that can be lethal.

Methanol is produced during the fermentation of alcoholic drinks, especially in the production of spirits like vodka and whiskey, but it's removed through the brewing process, so you're unlikely to encounter it in commercial spirits. If you make moonshine, hooch, poteen, or any other home-brewed spirits, though, you need to be very careful. These drinks are typically made by fermenting starch from crops such as corn, wheat, or potatoes. This results in a low-alcohol mixture called a mash, which is then connected to some pipework called a still, heated up, and distilled into a liquor with a high percentage of alcohol. The first liquid that emerges from the still is concentrated in methanol — you have to throw it away. Experienced home brewers know this, but people die every year after making moonshine for the first time.

Those in search of cheap alcohol sometimes resort to drinking alcohol-based liquids that are easy to buy, such as antifreeze, cleaning products, and perfumes. This is a very bad idea — not just because these liquids taste foul, but also because, since they are not designed to be drunk, the manufacturers don't always remove the methanol they contain. This can lead to tragic consequences. For instance, in December 2016, fifty-eight people died in Russia by drinking a scented bath oil. It wasn't the scented chemicals that killed them, but the methanol.

Here on the plane, though, the drinks trolley was coming past again, carrying alcoholic beverages that I was confident had little or no methanol content. When the flight attendant got to us, she asked if we would like any drinks to accompany our meal. Susan asked for white wine, while I opted for red.「I couldn't taste the vanilla in the white,」I said to her,「but see if you have any luck.」Susan smiled, poured her wine, raised her glass to me, but said nothing and returned to reading her book. She seemed pleased that I had started to chill out, and so was I. Alcohol is, of course, a relaxant and a social lubricant — a drug, yes, but a legally sanctioned one that provides more benefits to society than the problems it causes — or at least that's the story we tell ourselves. Getting intoxicated can make people more relaxed, or it can make them more antagonistic. In either case, they also become less able to make clear, rational decisions. Which makes you wonder why the dangers of intoxication are not mentioned in the preflight safety briefing: surely a drunk person is less safe in an emergency, and less able to make good decisions that affect others? But then, that assumes that the briefing is really about safety, which, as already mentioned, I don't believe it is.

While drinking wine may not increase your safety, it has other uses, one of which the attendant had alluded to: it is a traditional accompaniment to meals. Apart from being delicious in itself, it acts as a very effective palate cleanser, making the food itself more enjoyable. One of the key flavor components of wine is its astringency: the feeling of dry, parched roughness in the mouth. Pomegranate, pickles, and unripe fruit are all astringent foods. In wines, the astringency comes from tannins. These molecules, which originate in grape skins, break down the lubricating proteins in saliva and leave you with a dry mouth. But still, mild astringency in drinks is pleasurable, especially when you're drinking them with fatty foods. Fats lubricate the mouth, but although they can make a dish feel rich and luxurious, in excess they mask flavor and coat your mouth in clagginess and sickly oiliness. Astringency counteracts this fatty feeling, cleaning the mouth, removing any aftertaste from the food, and resetting your palate to neutral.

Studies show that palate-cleansing works best when an astringent drink is sipped in between bites of fatty foods; the pairing keeps the dry-mouth feeling associated with high tannins from building up, and does the same for the slippery feeling of fattiness. In other words, it makes sense to drink a red wine with steak, or a fatty fish such as salmon, no matter what anyone says about drinking red wines with fish. People think red wine will overwhelm the delicate taste of the fish, which is why they advise white. But in fact the flavor profiles of white wines (fruity, vanilla, and so on) overlap with those of red wines, and so the blanket rule is not helpful. Really, it's much more important to consider a wine's acidity and sweetness as you choose one to accompany your meal. Acidity is a measure of the sourness of the drink, while sweetness is a measure of a wine's dryness in the mouth. Some people, for instance, prefer wines that balance the bitterness of food, so they'd want to pair their meal with a glass of something dry and acidic. For instance, a full-flavored white Rioja goes well with glazed ham, while red Pinot Noir works very well with a Mediterranean fish stew.

In many cultures, food isn't paired with wine, but with spirits like vodka. Spirits are very effective palate cleansers because they contain a high percentage of ethanol, often 40 percent, which provides astringency. The alcohol also dissolves oils and fats in the mouth, along with their associated tastes. The advantage of drinking pure spirits with food is that they have very little flavor and so will not clash with a strongly flavored dish such as pickled herring.

The reason pure vodkas have so little flavor is because they have very little smell. Although the basic tastes of salty, sweet, sour, umami, and bitter are detected by taste buds in your mouth, the complex flavor profiles of food and drinks are detected by the thousands of olfactory receptors in your nose. Hence the importance of the bouquet of wine — this is why wine enthusiasts always sniff before drinking; most of the flavor you taste really comes from the wine's scent. It is also why wineglasses are designed with a large bowl. This is a vessel designed to hold the bouquet of the wine for your delight and appreciation.

When you eat, the release of smells inside your mouth accounts for most of the food's flavor, which is why, when you have a cold and mucus is covering your smell receptors, you can't taste the subtleties of whatever dish you're consuming. It also explains why wine tastes different at different temperatures: when it's served cold, only the very volatile substances evaporate in your mouth, and so you experience the flavor profile dominated by those; but when you warm the wine up, the smell is different. The extra energy allows more of the flavor molecules in the liquid to evaporate. This changes the aroma of the wine and so its taste. One of the main reasons why red and white wines are perceived to taste so very different from each other is that they are served at different temperatures. Cool down both a red wine and white wine, and then drink them in a blind taste test, and you'll see what I mean. At cooler temperatures many of fruitier flavor molecules stay in the liquid rather than contributing to the bouquet. This changes the balance of the flavor, so that acidity and dryness are empha sized, and for many this imparts a sense of crispness and clarity. When combined with the cooling effect on the palate, this can be an extremely delightful experience — a classic white-wine moment. Serve the same wine at room temperature and it tastes completely different. Now the acidity is muted by a fruity, passionate embrace that's not crisp but rather warm. There is no right and wrong here — it is just a matter of what you enjoy.

The red wine I was drinking on the plane was probably at about 70ºF; poured from a small bottle into my glass, the liquid had had time to warm to the ambient temperature of the aircraft.

Red wine in a glass, showing the Marangoni effect.

I swirled the wine around in the glass to gauge its alcohol content. I was looking for the Marangoni effect — when the wine forms tears as it flows down the glass. The ethanol in wine has the effect of lowering its surface tension with the glass, so when it's poured, it leaves a thin film. The alcohol in that coating quickly evaporates, leaving an area of liquid with a low concentration of alcohol, and thus a higher surface tension than the neighboring area. The unequal tensions pull the liquid apart, leaving a tear. The higher the alcohol concentration of the wine, the more pronounced this effect, so by looking at the Marangoni effect, you can get a sense of how alcoholic your wine is. My red had pronounced tears and so I estimated it to be a strong wine, with a high alcohol content of perhaps 14 percent, despite what the label said.

About that label. I closed my eyes and took a big glug without looking at the label to read the description. What could I taste? I found it had a strong, fruity, kind of, well, red-wine flavor. It wasn't bitter, but it wasn't sweet; it seemed fair to call it balanced. I wanted to say that it was smooth, but what did I mean by that? Clearly it was a liquid and therefore smooth by default. I guess I meant that it wasn't making my mouth feel dry or prickly — not astringent, then. I liked it, I thought, and allowed myself to peer at the label to see what it was meant to taste like.

「Deep violet, bags of blackcurrant and cherries, hints of bark; full of young tannins but still balanced, light body, fruity finish.」

Ah ha! I thought, having a quick look at Susan to see if she was reading her book. Which she was. She looked up quizzically, and I realized I'd spoken out loud. This made me realize I was a getting a little drunk, but not so drunk that I wasn't capable of realizing it, which was good.

The taste of wine owes more to its appearance (especially the label) and its cultural associations than many wine experts would like to admit. Studies show that flavor is constructed in the brain, which takes inputs not just from the taste buds in the mouth and the sensors in the nose, but also from your brain's expectation of what things should taste like. For instance, if you take strawberry ice cream and use a flavorless dye to change its color, making it, say, green, yellow, or orange, then people who taste the ice cream will have difficulty detecting the strawberry flavor. More likely than not, they'll taste flavors related to the color. If the ice cream is orange, they're likely to taste peach; if it's yellow, vanilla; and often green will taste like lime. What's perhaps most extraordinary about this, though, is that when I tried it myself, even when I knew the orange-colored ice cream I was eating was strawberry, I still seemed to taste peach. Clearly, flavor is a multisensory experience, and as the brain constructs the taste of a food or drink using sensory inputs from multiple sources, sight is so dominant that it often overrides other sensory input.

There are many theories as to why flavor is so influenced by vision. One of the primary ones has to do with how our brain interprets fragrance. Flavor is constructed from smell, and our detection of smells is approximately ten times slower than our visual detection. We have great difficulty identifying odors from specific molecules. This might be because single odors are recognized by multiple receptors in the nose. Even experts trained to detect particular molecular substances through smell fail to do so when these are mixed with four or five other smells. When you consider that wine has thousands of individual flavor molecules, the staggering challenge of wine tasting becomes evident. That our sense of smell doesn't provide enough information to reliably distinguish between mixtures of odors is evident if you play a simple game. Blindfold your fellow dinner guests one evening, and ask them to identify the liquids in a series of glasses that you pass to them (try orange juice, milk, cold coffee). The rules of the game are that they may only smell the substances, not taste or see them. Some drinks are easy, but most are difficult for your senses to detect correctly. After this, do not reveal the answers, but instead allow your guests to take off their blindfolds and now use smell and sight to identify the substances. This is much easier, now that you can bring to bear your experience of seeing and smelling that particular drink in the past. The game illustrates just how much we rely on vision to identify smell, and thus taste.

The importance of vision in appreciating wine was demonstrated most dramatically in a scientific study carried out in 2001 in France. A panel of fifty-four tasters were asked to judge the bouquet of two wines and comment on them. Both were Bordeaux wines; one was a white, made from Semillon and Sauvignon grapes, and the other was red, made from Cabernet Sauvignon and Merlot grapes. But the participants didn't know that a flavorless red dye had been added to the white. So far as the participants could tell, they were smelling two glasses of red. The color completely dominated their appreciation of the bouquet of the wines. Participants described both wines using words like「spicy,「intense,」and「blackcurrant,」even though one was a white wine with a flavor profile that did not match these descriptors.

But no matter how we manipulate the color of our drink, when the flavor we taste matches what we expected based on the drink's appearance, we tend to enjoy it more. Similarly, the bottle from which it is poured, the cleanliness and ambience of the space we're in, the attractiveness of the person serving us, and — especially in the case of wine — the association of sophistication and quality all change our drinking experience. Experiments have shown that we'll like wine more or less depending on where the label says it was produced, and that we'll enjoy it more if we hear something good about it before drinking — that it's won an award, for instance. Rather a lot of wines win awards, by the way; in many competitions, the vast majority of wines entered by the producers win a commendation.

If you're one of those people who think they don't know anything about wine, and you feel bewildered when you're handed a wine list in a restaurant, think about the unfamiliar names of the grapes, the countries of origin, and the dates of production as you would specifications of a car. You may or may not care whether your car has a gas or a diesel engine, or whether it has a 1.4-liter engine or 2.0-liter engine. These details may not be something you want to learn about. You may just want a car to get you from A to B reliably, and that's really all that matters to you. Most midpriced wines will do this beautifully, the A to B in the case of wines being a pleasant accompaniment to food, or a vehicle to let alcohol shift your mood, or a way to celebrate a birthday.

But perhaps you're someone who likes a car to do more than take you from A to B. Maybe you enjoy the sensation of getting there, screaming fast around corners, for instance, or, alternatively, having a smooth, floaty ride. Some wines are a vehicle for spikier flavors than others, while some, such as「natural」wines, really push the boundaries of what you expect a wine to taste like. These are not better wines; they are different wines, because all taste is subjective, and as with cars (and most of life), price is no reliable guide to these experiences. When you enjoy a wine, just like a ride in a car, you are enjoying a multisensory experience. Equally, if you buy an expensive brand of car, that's really what you're paying for — the brand, not the experience. Some people love having the most expensive cars; they get real enjoyment out of what that says about them as a person. It's the same with wines. But this doesn't mean that these are better wines or better cars, or even that the owners are more sophisticated people. Thus, if having the most expensive wine doesn't turn you on, then you're wasting your money on $75 bottles of wine. Most midpriced wines and many budget-priced wines have flavor profiles that are just as complex as those of top-priced wines — and blind testing shows this.

Meanwhile, on the plane I had finished yet another glass of wine and felt a headache coming on. It couldn't be a hangover already, could it? Or was I just dehydrated? One of the physiological effects of alcohol on the body is to inhibit the secretion of hormones that tell your kidneys to conserve water. If you don't drink water to compensate, you become dehydrated. The cabin crew were nowhere to be seen, so I dug out the expensive bottle of water I'd bought in departures. The bottle hissed open and I took a greedy glug. That felt good. Looking out the window, I could see a much bigger body of liquid water below — the beautiful blue ocean, stretching all the way out to the horizon.