# 0501. Fantastic

I LOWERED THE WINDOW shade, shutting out the bright sunshine. This always seems such a perverse thing to do; barely a day goes by in my normal life when I don't dream of jumping through the gray clouds that perpetually hang over London to bask in the sunshine above. But having been in the sky for a while, I wanted to watch a movie and I needed it to be dark so I could see the screen properly. My neighbor, Susan, looked up sharply when I closed the shade: it affected her too. So I raised the shade a tiny bit, letting some bright shafts of light back in, and made the thumbs-up gesture, asking if it was OK to put the shade down; she nodded her consent, clicked on her overhead light, and buried herself back in her book. I felt like I'd annoyed her.

If only a screen could be more like a painting, I thought, a painting made of pigments that could change, allowing characters on the canvas to move as they would in a film. Then I wouldn't have to lower the shade at all. But no sooner had this thought entered my head than I realized that the very book Susan was reading, The Picture of Dorian Gray, was about a painting exactly like that. This was a bit uncanny, and in keeping with the book's spooky plot. Oscar Wilde wrote the novel in 1890, just as liquid crystals were first being discovered; he couldn't have known that they would give rise to the flat-screen technology I was using to watch Spider-Man —  nor could he have known that liquid crystals were the very technology capable of creating the magical but sinister painting at the heart of his novel.

In the book, the eponymous Dorian Gray, a good-looking, rich young man, has his portrait painted. When Dorian sees the finished work, he's stung by the thought that he will age and become less beautiful, but the painting will not. He complains:

It will never be older than this particular day of June . . . If it were only the other way! If it were I who was to be always young, and the picture that was to grow old! For that — for that — I would give everything! Yes, there is nothing in the whole world I would not give! I would give my soul for that!

An illustration of the moment when Dorian Gray first sees his youthful portrait.

Dorian's wish is mysteriously granted. He pursues a hedonistic life, in love with his own beauty, youth, and the sensual pleasures they bring him, destroying the lives of others as he does so. The painting, in effect, gives him superpowers, though different from those of Spider-Man, who was now leaping across my screen. Spider-Man has super strength, the ability to cling to buildings, and a「spider-sense」that allows him to detect danger. Dorian Gray's superpower is that he never ages or becomes less beautiful; it is his picture that ages in his place. My eyes flicked across to Susan — who was now in darkness, reading The Picture of Dorian Gray in a pool of overhead light — and it got me thinking how hard it would be to create a moving portrait.

When you dab paint on a canvas, the liquid sticks to it, and to any other layers of paint you've already put down — just as our early ancestors learned in making their cave paintings, paint is effectively a colored glue. Thus, a paint's job is to turn from a liquid into a solid and then stay in place permanently. Different paints achieve this in different ways. Watercolor paint does it by drying, releasing water into the air through evaporation and leaving only the pigments on the page. Oil paint is made of oils — usually poppy, nut, or linseed oils. It doesn't dry. Instead, it has another trick up its sleeve: it reacts with oxygen in the air. Normally, this type of reaction is to be avoided, because oxidation turns butter and cooking oils, for example, rancid and bitter-tasting. But in the case of oil paint it is an advantage. Oils are composed of long hydrocarbon-chain molecules. The oxygen grabs a carbon atom from one chain and joins it to another through a reaction, in the process opening that molecule to further reactions. In other words, oxygen acts as a hardener (just as water acts as a hardener in superglue) — and yes, this is yet another polymerization reaction.

This reaction is extremely useful because it produces a hard, waterproof finish of plastic on the canvas (oil painting could more accurately be referred to as plastic painting); it's incredibly resilient and holds up very well with age. The polymerization takes time, though, since oxygen has to diffuse through the top, hard layers of paint before it can get to the unreacted oil underneath. This is the downside of oil paint — you have to wait a long time for it to harden. But the great masters of oil painting, like Van Eyck, Vermeer, and Titian, used this to their advantage. They overlaid many thin layers of oil paint, which one by one chemically reacted with oxygen and hardened, building up a number of layers of semi-transparent plastic, one on top of another, a complex encasing of many differently colored pigments.

Layering paint gradually like this allows the artist to create wonderfully nuanced work because when the light hits the canvas, it doesn't just bounce off the top layer — some of it penetrates through to the layers below, interacting with the pigments deep in the painting and rebounding as colored light. Or, alternatively, it is fully absorbed by the different layers and thus produces deep blacks. It's a sophisticated way of controlling color, luminosity, and texture, which is exactly why the Renaissance artists adopted oil paint. Analysis of Titian's painting Resurrection reveals nine layers of oil paint, all working to create complex visual effects. It's exactly the intricate expressiveness of oil paint that made Renaissance art so sensual and passionate. The effect of layering is so powerful that it has transcended its roots in painting with oils and is now incorporated into all professional digital illustration tools. If you use Photoshop, or Illustrator, or any other computer graphics tools, you'll be making images in layers.

Linseed oil is also used for many applications beyond oil paint, such as treating wood, to create a transparent, protective plastic barrier — just as oil paint does, but this time, without color. Cricket bats are just one of many wooden objects traditionally given an outer coating using linseed oil. You can also go whole hog and use linseed oil to make a solid material called linoleum, again through a polymerization reaction. Linoleum, a plastic, has been used by designers and interior decorators as a waterproof floor covering. Artists use linoleum too. They carve images into it just as they do with woodcuts, to create prints. Here again, layers are the primary way of building up complexity in the final work.

A lino print, The Secret Lemonade Drinker, by Ruby Wright.

As visually absorbing as they are, neither printmaking nor oil painting will give you a moving image. But if you take a carbon-based molecule, one not so different from those found in linseed oil, such as 4-cyano-4'-pentylbiphenyl, suddenly a moving image becomes possible.

The molecular structure of 4-cyano-4'-pentylbiphenyl, commonly used in liquid crystals.

The main body of a 4-cyano-4'-pentylbiphenyl molecule is made up of two hexagonal rings. This gives it a rigid structure, but the electrons binding it together are not evenly distributed: it is a polar molecule. There are areas concentrated in negative electrical charge and some concentrated in positive electrical charge. The positive charges on one molecule attract the negative charges on another, increasing the tendency of molecules to align with one another in an organized structure — a crystal. But the tail of 4-cyano-4'-pentylbiphenyl has a CH3 group on it, one that's flexible and wriggles, acting in opposition to the formation of a crystal. Hence, 4-cyano-4'-pentylbiphenyl structures are partly organized and partly fluid — a so-called liquid crystal.

Above a temperature of 95ºF, the influence of the CH3 tail wins, and 4-cyano-4'-pentylbiphenyl behaves like a normal transparent oil. But cool it down to room temperature, and the liquid becomes milky in appearance. It's not solid at this temperature, but something odd has happened to it. The molecules have begun to align with one another in much the same way that fish align when they're part of a shoal. It's very unusual for liquids to have a structure like this. One of the definitive qualities of a liquid is that its atoms and molecules have too much energy to stay in one place for any length of time, and so they are constantly rotating, vibrating, and migrating. But liquid crystals are different — the molecules are still dynamic, and can flow, but they keep aligned in their orientation, which has been compared to the regular alignment of atoms in a crystal — hence the name.

An illustration of the difference in structure among a crystal, a liquid crystal, and a liquid.

The alignment isn't perfect, though; because the molecules are in a liquid state, they keep moving around, swapping places, and joining other shoals. But the polar molecules give the liquid crystal another useful property — they respond to applied electric fields. They do so by changing their direction of alignment. Thus, you can get a whole shoal to point in a particular direction by applying a voltage. This turns out to be key to the technological suc cess of liquid crystals; it's what allows them to be integrated into electronic devices.

When light travels through a liquid crystal, subtle changes occur; the polarization changes. To make sense of this, think about light as a wave: a wave of oscillating electric and magnetic fields. But which direction do they oscillate in? Up and down, side to side, or left and right? Standard light from the sun oscillates in all of these directions. But if it bounces off a smooth surface, the surface will encourage the oscillations to move in certain directions and suppress others, depending on which ones it's aligned with. Thus, the rebounding light will contain some oscillations and not others. This is called polarized light.

It's not just surfaces that do this to light. Some transparent materials will change the polarization of light too; polarized sunglasses, for instance. The lenses of polarized sunglasses let only one direction of oscillation through. This obviously reduces the intensity of the light reaching your eyes, which is why you see the world as darker. They're especially useful at the beach, not just because they shade your eyes, but because the glare coming off the surface of a smooth sea is also polarized, and the lenses are designed to block it out. Fishermen use polarized sunglasses to help them see underwater more easily, and photographers use polarized lenses for the same reason — to cut the glare.

Some spiders can detect polarized light, and I wondered if this could be part of Spider-Man's ability to react quickly to danger, his so-called「spider-sense.」In the film, he'd just narrowly escaped being captured by Dr. Octopus with an uncanny, split-second decision that allowed him to evade the villain's tentacles. The special effects were amazing, and I grinned at Susan, forgetting that despite my interest in her book, she may not have a reciprocal interest in Spider-Man.

Liquid crystals change the polarization of light — that's how the image of Spider-Man was being conjured up in the screen in front of me. If you put a lens from your polarized sunglasses on the surface of a liquid crystal, the light coming out of the liquid crystal will appear bright if its polarization is aligned with the lens, but otherwise it will appear dark. But here is the neat trick: if you switch the structure of the liquid crystal using an electric field, the polarization of the liquid crystal also changes. So, at the flick of a switch, you can turn the light on and off. Suddenly, you have a device that is capable of giving out white light, and then none, and then going back to white again, as fast as you can electronically switch the liquid-crystal structure — the makings of a black-and-white screen.

It may sound simple, but it took decades to achieve. It was an Austrian botanist by the name of Friedrich Reinitzer who first categorized the weird behavior of liquid crystals in 1888, just two years before Oscar Wilde wrote The Picture of Dorian Gray. While many scientists studied them over the course of the next eighty years, no one could really find a use for them. It wasn't until 1972, when the Hamilton Watch Company launched the first digital watch, called the Pulsar Time Computer, that liquid crystals found their moment. The watch looked great, unlike any other watch that had come before it, and it cost more than the average car. People who bought it thought they were buying the future — and they were right. Digital technology was coming, and this was the first mass-market entry in what would become a trillion-dollar industry.

The Pulsar Time Computer was made with light-emitting diodes — LEDs — which were themselves made from semiconductor crystals that emit red light in response to an electric current. They looked great, especially on a black background, and the rich and famous went crazy for them — even James Bond wore one in the 1973 film Live and Let Die. The drawback of LEDs at that time, though, was their high energy consumption; the batteries in those first digital watches had very short lives. In order to satisfy the sensational demand for the new digital watches, a more energy-efficient screen technology was needed. Suddenly, after decades as a lab curiosity, liquid crystals had their moment. They quickly dominated the digital-watch market because the electric power required to switch a liquid-crystal pixel from white to black is absolutely minuscule. They were cheap too — so cheap that manufacturers started making the whole display screen out of liquid crystal — this is the gray screen you see on a digital watch. The watch electronically switches certain areas of the gray liquid crystal to block polarized light, which creates black. This allows the watch to show changing numbers, so you can view the time, or date, or anything else that can be conveyed in this small digital format.

A Casio calculator watch.

One of my strongest memories from childhood is the insane jealousy I felt when my friend Merul Patel came back to school after the holidays with the new Casio digital watch and calculator. I was ridiculously impressed as he nonchalantly pressed the tiny little buttons, which beeped happily at him. Of course, I see now it's kind of dumb — who really wants a tiny calculator? But still, at the time, I was completely captivated. It was the beginning of my addiction to gadgets.

Even though digital watches have lost their cool, they've been replaced by a seemingly never-ending parade of other digital devices, not least of which is the cellphone, which still uses liquid- crystal displays. It may seem surprising, but the same basic technology used in a digital watch also yielded the modern smartphone screen, capable of displaying color video. This brings us right back to oil paintings, and the puzzle of creating the moving painting depicted in the novel The Picture of Dorian Gray. Liquid crystals could perhaps be just what's needed — but how do they create color?

We all know that if you take yellow paint and mix it with blue, our eyes interpret that mixture as green. Similarly, if you take red paint and add blue, you get purple. Color theory shows that you can make any particular color by mixing together combinations of primary colors. In the printing industry, cyan (C), magenta (M), and yellow (Y) are generally used, with the addition of black (K) liquid to control contrast. This is also how inkjet printers work and why you see the abbreviation CMYK on printer cartridges. These colors are printed onto the page, dot by dot, and it's our eyes and visual system that integrate them. We've known for a long time that the eye can be fooled in this way; Newton took note of this manipulation in the seventeenth century. In the nineteenth century it formed the basis of a painting technique — pointillism. Blobs of pigments placed close together remained physically unmixed, so their brightness and luminosity could be controlled to create the effect the artist wanted. As predicted by color theory, it's possible to make any color by mixing paints this way, as long as the dots are small and placed close together. But changing a particular color once you've made the dots is another story. You'd have to physically change the ratios of the pigments on the canvas. Which means you would have to remove some dots and add others. Unless, of course, you found a way to put down dots with every possible combination of colors.

This is essentially how liquid-crystal color displays work, whether they're on your phone, your TV, or, as in my case, encased in the back of the seat in front of me on the plane. We call the dots pixels. Each pixel has three colored filters that let three primary colors through. For displays these are red (R), green (G), and blue (B) — hence the abbreviation RGB. If they are all emitted equally, then the pixel appears white, even though it's made up of three separate colors. You can see this for yourself if you put a small drop of water on your phone and look through it onto the screen. The water behaves as a magnifying glass, which allows you to see the sets of red, green, and blue.

Just as the masters of oil painting had to work out how to bring darkness and shadow into their work by mixing colors and inventing a color theory for perception, so are today's liquid-crystal-display engineers and scientists pushing the boundaries of color display with moving images. And just as in the Renaissance, when oil painting battled it out with other techniques and mediums, such as fresco and egg tempera, so these days do liquid-crystal displays (LCDs) compete with organic light-emitting diodes (OLEDs). This battle, which is currently being played out in every new generation of TVs, tablets, and smartphones, has its own arcane language. LCDs, you might be told by an online blog, can't show deep blacks because the polarizers that keep light from coming through during a dark scene in a movie aren't 100 percent effective; you end up with grays. Similarly, because of the way color is created in LCDs, the absolute brightness of some hues suffers. Hence the issue with the window shade in the airplane cabin, and not wanting to have sunlight reflecting off the screen.

Nevertheless, the displays have got better and better, thanks to great innovations that ultimately aren't so different from layering oil paint. For example, the addition of an active-matrix layer allows some of the pixels to be switched independently from others. Thus, some parts of the image can be given higher contrast than others — instead of having to set the contrast for the whole image. This is useful for scenes of a movie that are partially lit. It is all done automatically, of course, with transistor technology — that's what the「active」means in「active matrix.」Engineers have also learned to improve the way the image changes, so that you can see it well from almost any viewing angle. It used to be that the screen couldn't be seen well from certain angles, but now a「diffuser layer」has been incorporated, which spreads the light out as it leaves the screen. In comparison, the technology of OLEDs, which are the successors of the red-light-emitting diodes of the original digital watch, the Pulsar Time Computer, are now energy-efficient. They also have a much larger palette of colors and near-perfect viewing angles. But despite being much more expensive than LCDs, they're still not yet as bright.

LCDs may not be perfect, but they are essentially the dynamic canvas that Oscar Wilde dreamed of. It's now possible to have a portrait of yourself on display in your hall (or your attic) that updates daily. When liquid-crystal displays became really cheap a few years ago, people started giving them to one another as presents, in the form of dynamic photo frames. But these didn't become that popular. In fact, people hated them, just as Dorian Gray loathed his dynamic portrait. I'm convinced it wasn't the quality of the image that repelled them — plenty of people love looking at themselves on their liquid-crystal smartphone display — but rather something about the very nature of these displays. They're impostors, something fluid, magical, and dreamlike pretending to be a solid, dependable, real photograph of a moment frozen in time.

When applied to television in the form of flat-panel TVs, that same technology has been hugely popular. Switching the color of the pixels in a coordinated manner allows TV screens to display moving pictures. They're why we can see actors talking, gesturing, and making different facial expressions, and, in the case of the movie I was watching, leaping from building to building, saving the world from evil. Even though I knew what I was watching wasn't real, that it was just a collection of primary-color pixels flashing along to an accompanying soundtrack, it still stimulated me, both intellectually and emotionally, completely drawing me into the story. But here is the thing I find really difficult to understand. If I compare the experience of watching this film on a plane with standing in an art gallery viewing a masterpiece, such as Titian's Resurrection, I know which one is more likely to move me. It's the film, I'm afraid. I'm not proud of this. I know that Titian's paintings are great art and superhero movies played on a ten-inch display are not. Why am I so shallow? Could it be that at forty thousand feet I lose all taste in art? Or is it something to do with the heightened emotional state experienced while flying?

Static images like paintings and photographs allow us to contemplate ourselves, and how much we've changed from viewing to viewing. As we revisit great works of art, be they by Titian, Van Gogh, or Frida Kahlo, over our lifetime we can trace our reactions to them. The images may remain the same, but our sense of what they mean changes as we change. The magical liquid screens on airplanes act in the opposite manner; they are dynamic and offer us a vivid window into another world. They let us escape ourselves. Flying above the clouds, in a darkened cabin, we enter a fantasy. We can act, for a little while, like gods, looking down on the deeds of humans through our liquid portals, observing them, laughing at their foolishness, shaking our heads at their crazy ways. In doing so, our emotions are heightened. Some academic research suggests that this is due to the extreme contrast between experiencing a feeling of warm intimacy toward the characters depicted in the film, and the stark reality of sitting next to strangers in a tube while flying at four thousand feet in the air. This certainly rings true for me. I only ever cry when watching films on planes; small tears well up at even the most schmaltzy of movies, and I laugh uproariously at comedies that, on the ground, would hardly raise a smile.

By the time my film had ended, Spider-Man was victorious, but there was no record of any of the scenes I'd watched in the actual liquid crystals. They'd gone blank, ready to take on another dream. I felt less godlike. I looked over at Susan, who'd wrapped herself in a blanket and was sleeping, curled up in a position that looked comfortable, although I knew from experience that it wasn't. I was tempted to open the window shade and feast my eyes on the sunny blue skies again, but I didn't want to risk waking Susan. I wondered if I was sleepy at all, and thought I'd have a try at nodding off. I removed my shoes, reclined my seat, and tried to forget how hard it usually is for me to fall asleep on an airplane.