# 参考文献
ABBOTT, EDWIN A., (1884) 1983, Flatland: A Romance in Many Dimensions (reprint of 1963 fifth edition with foreword by Isaac Asimov). New York: HarperCollins.

ALAIN [Émile-Auguste Chartier], (1908) 1956, Propos d'un Normand 1906–1914. Paris: Gallimard. Quoted in Deborah S. Rogers and Paul R. Ehrlich, 2008, "Natural Selection and Cultural Rates of Change." Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, vol. 105, pp.3416–3420.

AUSTIN, J. L., 1961, Philosophical Papers. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

AXELROD, ROBERT, 1984, The Evolution of Cooperation. New York: Basic Books.

AXELROD, ROBERT, and WILLIAM HAMILTON, 1981, "The Evolution of Cooperation." Science, vol. 211, pp. 1390–1396.

BARRETT, JUSTIN, 2000, "Exploring the Natural Foundations of Religion." Trends in Cognitive Science, vol. 4, pp. 29–34.

BATESON, WILLIAM, 1916, Review of the Mechanisms of Mendelian Heredity by T. H. Morgan (1914).

BEHE, MICHAEL J., 1996, Darwin's Black Box: The Biochemical Challenge to Evolution. New York: Free Press.

BENNETT, MAX, DANIEL DENNETT, P. M. S. HACKER, and JOHN SEARLE, 2009, Neuroscience and Philosophy: Brain, Mind, and Language. New York: Columbia University Press.

BENNETT, MAX, and P. M. S. HACKER, 2003, Philosophical Foundations of Neuroscience. Malden, Mass.: Wiley-Blackwell.

BLOCK, NED, 1978, "Troubles with Functionalism." In W. Savage, ed., Perception and Cognition: Issues in the Foundations of Psychology. Minnesota Studies in the Philosophy of Science, vol. 9. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, pp. 261–326.

BLOCK, NED, 1994, "What Is Dennett's Theory a Theory of?" Philosophical Topics, vol. 22 (special issue on the philosophy of Daniel Dennett), pp. 23–40.

BOBROW, DANIEL, 1985, Qualitative Reasoning about Physical Systems. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.

BORGES, J. L., 1962, Labyrinths: Selected Stories and Other Writings. New York: New Directions.

BRAY, DENNIS, 2009, Wetware. New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press.

BROCKMAN, J., ED., 2009, What Have You Changed Your Mind About. New York: HarperCollins.

BROCKMAN, J., ED., 2012, This Will Make You Smarter. New York: Harper Torchbook.

BROOKS, R. A., 1987, Planning Is Just a Way of Avoiding Figuring Out What to Do Next. Technical report, MIT Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, Cambridge, Mass. Available at http://people.csail.mit.edu/brooks/papers/Planning%20is%20Just.pdf.

BROOKS, RODNEY, 1991, "Intelligence without Representation." Artificial Intelligence, vol. 47, pp. 139–159.

CANN, REBECCA L., MARK STONEKING, and ALLAN C. WILSON, 1987, "Mitochondrial DNA and Human Evolution." Nature, vol. 325, pp. 31–36.

CHALMERS, DAVID, 1995, "Facing Up to the Problem of Consciousness." Journal of Consciousness Studies, vol. 2, no. 3, pp. 200–219.

CLARK, A., 2013, "Whatever Next? Predictive Brains, Situated Agents, and the Future of Cognitive Science." Behavioral and Brain Sciences.

CLEGG, LIAM, 2012, Protean Free Will. California Institute of Technology, Pasadena.Available at http://authors.library.caltech.edu/29887/.

COPE, DAVID, 2000, The Algorithmic Composer. Middleton, Wisc.: A-R Editions.

COPE, DAVID, 2001, Virtual Music: Computer Synthesis of Musical Style. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.

CRONIN, HELENA, 1991, The Ant and the Peacock. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

DAMIAAN, DENYS, MARISKA MANTIONE, MARTIJN FIGEE, PEPIJN VAN DEN MUNCKHOF, FRANK KOERSELMAN, HERMAN WESTENBERG, ANDRIES BOSCH, and RICK SCHUURMAN, 2010, "Deep Brain Stimulation of the Nucleus Accumbens for Treatment-Refractory Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder." Archives of General Psychiatry, vol. 67, no. 10, pp. 1061–1068.

DAVIDSON, DONALD, 1987, "Knowing One's Own Mind." Proceedings and Addresses of the American Philosophical Association, vol. 60, pp. 441–458. Reprinted in Davidson, Donald, 2001, Subjective, Intersubjective, Objective. New York: Oxford University Press, pp.15–38.

DAWKINS, RICHARD, 1976, The Selfish Gene. Oxford: Oxford University Press. Rev.ed. 1989.

DAWKINS, RICHARD, 1982, The Extended Phenotype: The Gene as the Unit of Selection. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

DAWKINS, RICHARD, 1986, The Blind Watchmaker. London: Longmans.

DAWKINS, RICHARD, 1996, Climbing Mount Improbable. London: Viking Penguin.

DAWKINS, RICHARD, 2004, The Ancestor's Tale: A Pilgrimage to the Dawn of Time. London: Weidenfeld & Nicolson.

DE VRIES, PETER, 1953, The Vale of Laughter. Boston: Little, Brown.

DEHAENE, S., and J. F. MARQUES, 2002, "Cognitive Euroscience: Scalar Variability in Price Estimation and the Cognitive Consequences of Switching to the Euro." Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, vol. 55, pp. 705–731.

DENNETT, DANIEL C., 1968, "Features of Intentional Action." Philosophy and Phenomenological Research, vol. 29 (December), pp. 232–244.

DENNETT, DANIEL C., 1969, Content and Consciousness. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.

DENNETT, DANIEL C., 1971, "Intentional Systems." Journal of Philosophy, vol. 68, pp. 87–106.

DENNETT, DANIEL C., 1975, "Brain Writing and Mind Reading." In K. Gunderson, ed., Language, Mind and Knowledge. Minnesota Studies in the Philosophy of Science, vol. 7. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, pp. 403–416. Reprinted in Dennett 1978a.

DENNETT, DANIEL C., 1978a, Brainstorms. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press/A Bradford Book.

DENNETT, DANIEL C., 1978b, "Current Issues in the Philosophy of Mind." American Philosophical Quarterly, vol. 15, pp. 249–261.

DENNETT, DANIEL C., 1978c, "Why You Can't Make a Computer That Feels Pain." Synthese, vol. 38 (August), pp. 415–456.

DENNETT, DANIEL C., 1980, "The Milk of Human Intentionality" (commentary on Searle). Behavioral and Brain Sciences, vol. 3, pp. 428–430.

DENNETT, DANIEL C., 1981, "Three Kinds of Intentional Psychology." In R. Healey, ed., Reduction, Time and Reality. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 37–61.

DENNETT, DANIEL C., 1982a, "Beyond Belief." In A. Woodfield, ed., Thought and Object: Essays on Intentionality. Oxford: Oxford University Press. Reprinted in Dennett, 1987.

DENNETT, DANIEL C., 1982b, "How to Study Consciousness Empirically: or Nothing Comes to Mind." Synthese, vol. 53, pp. 159–180.

DENNETT, DANIEL C., 1982c, "The Myth of the Computer: An Exchange" (reply to John Searle's review of The Mind's I). New York Review of Books, vol. 29 (June 24), pp. 56–57.

DENNETT, DANIEL C., 1982d, "Notes on Prosthetic Imagination." New Boston Review, vol. 7 (June), pp. 3–7. Reprinted in "30 Years of Boston Review." Boston Review, vol. 30, no.5 (September/October 2005), p. 40.

DENNETT, DANIEL C., 1983, "Intentional Systems in Cognitive Ethology: The 'Panglossian Paradigm' Defended." Behavioral and Brain Sciences, vol. 6, pp. 343–390.

DENNETT, DANIEL C., 1984a, Elbow Room: The Varieties of Free Will Worth Wanting. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.

DENNETT, DANIEL C., 1984b, "I Could Not Have Done Otherwise—So What?" Journal of Philosophy, vol. 81, pp. 553–565.

DENNETT, DANIEL C., 1986, "The Logical Geography of Computational Approaches: A View from the East Pole." In Robert M. Harnish and M. Brand, eds., The Representation of Knowledge and Belief. Tucson: University of Arizona Press, pp. 59–79.

DENNETT, DANIEL C., 1987, The Intentional Stance. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.

DENNETT, DANIEL C., 1988a, "Quining Qualia." In A. Marcel and E. Bisiach, eds., Consciousness in Modern Science. Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 42–77.

DENNETT, DANIEL C., 1988b, "Why Everyone Is a Novelist." Times Literary Supplement, vol. 4 (September 16–22), p. 459.

DENNETT, DANIEL C., 1988c, "Evolution, Error and Intentionality." In Y. Wilks and D. Partridge, eds., Sourcebook on the Foundations of Artificial Intelligence. Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press, pp. 190–211.

DENNETT, DANIEL C., 1990, "Memes and the Exploitation of Imagination." Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism, vol. 48, pp. 127–135.

DENNETT, DANIEL C., 1991a, Consciousness Explained. Boston: Little, Brown.

DENNETT, DANIEL C., 1991b, "Real Patterns." Journal of Philosophy, vol. 88, pp.27–51.

DENNETT, DANIEL C., 1993, "Confusion over Evolution: An Exchange." New York Review of Books, January 14, pp. 43–44.

DENNETT, DANIEL C., 1994a, "Get Real" (reply to my critics). Philosophical Topics, vol. 22 (special issue on the philosophy of Daniel Dennett), pp. 505–556.

DENNETT, DANIEL C., 1994b, "The Practical Requirements for Making a Conscious Robot." Proceedings of the Royal Society, A, vol. 349, pp. 133–146.

DENNETT, DANIEL C., 1995a, Darwin's Dangerous Idea: Evolution and the Meanings of Life. New York: Simon & Schuster.

DENNETT, DANIEL C., 1995b, "How to Make Mistakes." In J. Brockman and K. Matson, eds., How Things Are. New York: William Morrow, pp. 137–144.

DENNETT, DANIEL C., 1996a, Kinds of Minds: Towards an Understanding of Consciousness. New York: Basic Books.

DENNETT, DANIEL C., 1996b, "Review of Other Minds: Critical Essays, 1969–1994 by Thomas Nagel, 1995." Journal of Philosophy, vol. 63, no. 8 (August), pp. 425–428.

DENNETT, DANIEL C., 2000, "With a Little Help from My Friends." In Don Ross, Andrew Brook, and David Thompson, eds., Dennett's Philosophy: A Comprehensive Assessment. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, pp. 327–388.

DENNETT, DANIEL C., 2001a, "Collision-Detection, Muselot, and Scribble: Some Reflections on Creativity." In Cope, 2001, pp. 283–291.

DENNETT, DANIEL C., 2001b, "Consciousness: How Much Is That in Real Money?" In R. Gregory, ed., The Oxford Companion to the Mind, 2nd ed. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

DENNETT, DANIEL C., 2001c, "Explaining the 'Magic' of Consciousness." In Exploring Consciousness, Humanities, Natural Science, Religion, Proceedings of the International Symposium, Milano, November 19-20, 2001 (published in December 2002, Fondazione Carlo Erba), pp. 47–58.

DENNETT, DANIEL C., 2001d, "In Darwin's Wake, Where Am I?" (American Philosophical Association Presidential Address). Proceedings and Addresses of the American Philosophical Association, vol. 75, no. 2 (November), pp. 13–30. Reprinted in J. Hodge and G. Radick, eds., 2003, The Cambridge Companion to Darwin. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 357–376.

DENNETT, DANIEL C., 2001e, "Things about Things." In Joao Branquinho, ed., The Foundations of Cognitive Science. Oxford: Clarendon Press, pp. 133–149.

DENNETT, DANIEL C., 2002, "The New Replicators." In Mark Pagel, ed., The Encyclopedia of Evolution, vol. 1. Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. E83–E92.

DENNETT, DANIEL C., 2003, Freedom Evolves. New York: Viking Penguin.

DENNETT, DANIEL C., 2004, "Holding a Mirror up to Dupré" (commentary on John Dupré, Human Nature and the Limits of Science). Philosophy and Phenomenological Research, vol. 69, no. 2 (September), pp. 473–483.

DENNETT, DANIEL C., 2005a, "Natural Freedom." Metaphilosophy, vol. 36, no. 4 (July), pp. 449–459.

DENNETT, DANIEL C., 2005b, Sweet Dreams: Philosophical Obstacles to a Science of Consciousness. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.

DENNETT, DANIEL C., 2006a, Breaking the Spell: Religion as a Natural Phenomenon. New York: Viking Penguin.

DENNETT, DANIEL C., 2006b, "From Typo to Thinko: When Evolution Graduated to Semantic Norms." In S. Levinson and P. Jaisson, eds., Evolution and Culture. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, pp. 133–145.

DENNETT, DANIEL C., 2006c, "The Higher-Order Truths about Chmess." Topoi, pp.39–41.

DENNETT, DANIEL C., 2007a, "The God Delusion by Richard Dawkins." Free Inquiry, vol. 27, no. 1 (December/January 2007).

DENNETT, DANIEL C., 2007b, "Heterophenomenology Reconsidered." Phenomenology and Cognitive Science, vol. 6, nos. 1 and 2 (special issue on heterophenomenology, Alva Noë, ed.), pp. 247–270.

DENNETT, DANIEL C., 2007c, "Varieties of Content." Presentation at Concepts: Content and Constitution, A Symposium, University of Copenhagen, Amager, Denmark, May 12.

DENNETT, DANIEL C., 2007d, "What RoboMary Knows." In T. Alter and S. Walter, eds., Phenomenal Concepts and Phenomenal Knowledge: New Essays on Consciousness and Physicalism. Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 15–31.

DENNETT, DANIEL C., 2008, "Competition in the Brain." World Question Center. Edge.org, December, later published in Brockman, 2009.

DENNETT, DANIEL C., 2009a, "Darwin's 'Strange Inversion of Reasoning.'" Proceedings of the National Academy of the Sciences of the United States of America, vol. 106, suppl. 1, pp. 10061–10065.

DENNETT, DANIEL C., 2009b, "Heterophenomenology." In T. Bayne, A. Cleeremans, and P. Wilken, eds., The Oxford Companion to Consciousness. Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 345–346.

DENNETT, DANIEL C., 2009c, "Intentional Systems Theory." In B. McLaughlin, A. Beckermann, and S. Walter, eds., The Oxford Handbook of Philosophy of Mind. Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 339–350.

DENNETT, DANIEL C., 2010, "Homunculi Rule: Reflections on Darwinian Populations and Natural Selection by Peter Godfrey-Smith, Oxford University Press, 2009." Biology and Philosophy (published online December 21). Available at http://ase.tufts.edu/cogstud/papers/homunculi.pdf.

DENNETT, DANIEL C., 2011a, "Cycles" (as an answer to the Edge Question 2011, "What Scientific Concept Would Improve Everybody's Cognitive Toolkit?"). World Question Center. Edge.org, later published in Brockman, 2012, pp. 81–88.

DENNETT, DANIEL C., 2011b, "Shall We Tango? No, but Thanks for Asking" (commentaries on Evan Thompson, Mind in Life, with replies). Journal of Consciousness Studies, vol. 18, nos. 5 and 6 (special issue on Evan Thompson), pp. 23–34.

DENNETT, DANIEL C., 2012, "Sakes and Dints." Times Literary Supplement, March 2, pp. 12–14.

DENNETT, DANIEL C., forthcoming, "The Evolution of Reasons." In BANA BASHOUR and HANS D. MULLER, eds., Contemporary Philosophical Naturalism and Its Implications. New York: Routledge.

DENNETT, DANIEL C., forthcoming, "Expecting Ourselves to Expect" (commentary on Clark). Behavioral and Brain Sciences.

DENNETT, DANIEL C., forthcoming, "Kinds of Things." In Don Ross, James Ladyman, and Harold Kincaid, eds., Does Scientific Philosophy Exclude Metaphysics? Oxford: Oxford University Press.

DENNETT, DANIEL C., forthcoming, "Turing's 'Strange Inversion of Reasoning.'" In Barry Cooper, ed., Alan Turing—His Work and Impact. Elsevier.

DENNETT, DANIEL C., and KATHLEEN AKINS, 2008, "The Multiple Drafts Model." Scholarpedia, vol. 3, no. 4, 4321. http://www.scholarpedia.org/wiki/index.php?title=Multiple_drafts_model.

DENNETT, DANIEL C., and ALVIN PLANTINGA, 2011, Science and Religion: Are They Compatible? Oxford: Oxford University Press.

DENNETT, DANIEL C., and C. F. WESTBURY, 2000, "Mining the Past to Construct the Future: Memory and Belief as Forms of Knowledge." In D. Schacter and E. Scarry, eds., Memory, Brain, and Belief. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, pp. 11–32.

DENTON, MICHAEL, 1985, Evolution: A Theory in Crisis. London: Burnett Books.

DEWDNEY, A. K., 1984, The Planiverse: Computer Contact with a Two-Dimensional World. New York: Poseidon Press.

EIGEN, MANFRED, 1992, Steps towards Life. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

ELLIS, HAYDN, and ANDREW YOUNG, 1990, "Accounting for Delusional Misidentifications." British Journal of Psychiatry, vol. 157, pp. 239–248.

FEYNMAN, RICHARD, 1985, "Surely You're Joking, Mr. Feynman!": Adventures of a Curious Character. New York: W. W. Norton.

FITCH, TECUMSEH, 2008, "Nano-Intentionality: A Defense of Intrinsic Intentionality." Biology and Philosophy, vol. 23, pp. 157–177.

FITZGIBBON, C. D., and J. H. FANSHAWE, 1988, "Stotting in Thomson's Gazelles: An Honest Signal of Condition." Behavioral Ecology and Sociobiology, vol. 23, no. 2 (August), pp. 69–74.

FODOR, JERRY, 1975, The Language of Thought. Hassocks, Sussex: Harvester Press.

FODOR, JERRY, 2003, "Why Would Mother Nature Bother?" (review of Freedom Evolves). London Review of Books, vol. 25, no. 5, pp. 17–18.

FODOR, JERRY, 2008, LOT 2: The Language of Thought Revisited. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

FODOR, JERRY, and E. LEPORE, 1992, Holism: A Shopper's Guide. Oxford: Blackwell.

FODOR, JERRY, and M. PIATELLI-PALMERINI, 2010, What Darwin Got Wrong. New York: Farrar, Straus & Giroux.

FRANKFURT, HARRY, 1969, "Alternate Possibilities and Moral Responsibility." Journal of Philosophy, vol. 65, pp. 829–833.

GELL-MAN, MURRAY, 1995, The Quark and the Jaguar: Adventures in the Simple and the Complex. New York: St. Martin's.

GIBSON, J. J., 1979, The Ecological Approach to Visual Perception. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.

GODFREY-SMITH, PETER, 2009, Darwinian Populations and Natural Selection.Oxford: Oxford University Press.

GODFREY-SMITH, PETER, 2011, "Agents and Acacias: Replies to Dennett, Sterelny, and Queller" (replies to reviews of Darwinian Populations and Natural Selection). Biology and Philosophy, vol. 26, pp. 501–515.

GOFFMAN, ERVING, 1959, The Presentation of Self in Everyday Life. Edinburgh: University of Edinburgh Social Sciences Research Centre.

GOULD, STEPHEN JAY, 1977, Ever since Darwin. New York: W. W. Norton.

GOULD, STEPHEN JAY, 1989a, "Tires to Sandals." Natural History, April, pp. 8-15.

GOULD, STEPHEN JAY, 1989b, Wonderful Life: The Burgess Shale and the Nature of History. New York: W. W. Norton.

GOULD, STEPHEN JAY, 1992a, "The Confusion over Evolution." New York Review of Books, November 19.

GOULD, STEPHEN JAY, 1992b, "Life in a Punctuation." Natural History, October, pp.10–21.

GOULD, STEPHEN JAY, 1993, "Confusion over Evolution: An Exchange." New York Review of Books, January 14, pp. 43–44.

GRAHAM, GEORGE, and TERENCE HORGAN, 2000, "Mary Mary Quite Contrary." Philosophical Studies, vol. 99, pp. 59–87.

GREENE, JOSHUA, and JONATHAN COHEN, 2004, "For the Law, Neuroscience Changes Everything and Nothing." Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society, vol. 359, pp. 1775–1785.

HARRIS, SAM, 2012, Free Will. New York: Free Press.

HAUGELAND, JOHN, 1981, Mind Design. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press/Bradford Book.

HAUGELAND, JOHN, 1985, Artificial Intelligence: The Very Idea. Cambridge, Mass.:MIT Press.

HAWKING, STEPHEN W., 1988, A Brief History of Time. New York: Bantam.

HAYES, PATRICK, 1978, "The Naïve Physics Manifesto." In D. Michie, ed., Expert Systems in the Microelectronic Age. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.

HEIDER, F., and M. SIMMEL, 1944, "An Experimental Study of Apparent Behavior." American Journal of Psychology, vol. 57, no. 2, pp. 243–259.

HILLIARD, JOHN NORTHERN, 1938, Card Magic. Minneapolis: Carl W. Jones.

HOFSTADTER, DOUGLAS, 1979, Gödel Escher Bach. New York: Basic Books.

HOFSTADTER, DOUGLAS, 1982, "Metamagical Themas: Can Inspiration Be Mechanized?" Scientific American, September, pp. 18–34. Reprinted as "On the Seeming Paradox of Mechanizing Creativity," in Hofstadter, 1985, pp. 526–546.

HOFSTADTER, DOUGLAS, 1985, Metamagical Themas: Questing for the Essence of Mind and Pattern. New York: Basic Books.

HOFSTADTER, DOUGLAS, 1997, Le Ton Beau de Marot: In Praise of the Music of Language. New York: Basic Books.

HOFSTADTER, DOUGLAS, 2007, I Am a Strange Loop. New York: Basic Books.

HOFSTADTER, DOUGLAS, and DANIEL DENNETT, eds., 1981, The Mind's I. New York: Basic Books.

HOLLAND, JOHN, 1975, Adaptation in Natural and Artificial Systems. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.

HUME, DAVID, (1739) 1964, A Treatise of Human Nature (L. A. Selby-Bigge, ed.). Oxford: Clarendon.

HUMPHREY, NICHOLAS, 1987, "Scientific Shakespeare." The Guardian (London), August 26.

HUMPHREY, NICHOLAS, and DANIEL DENNETT, 1989, "Speaking for Our Selves: An Assessment of Multiple Personality Disorder." Raritan: A Quarterly Review, vol. 9(Summer), pp. 68–98. Reprinted (with footnotes), Occasional Paper 8, Center on Violence and Human Survival, John Jay College of Criminal Justice, City University of New York, 1991.

HURLEY, MATTHEW, DANIEL DENNETT, and REGINALD B. ADAMS JR., 2011, Inside Jokes: Using Humor to Reverse-Engineer the Mind. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.

JACKENDOFF, RAY, 1987, Consciousness and the Computational Mind. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press/Bradford Book.

JACKENDOFF, RAY, 1993, Patterns in the Mind: Language and Human Nature.Harlow, Essex: Harvester Wheatsheaf; New York: Basic Books, 1994.

JACKSON, FRANK, 1982, "Epiphenomenal Qualia." Philosophical Quarterly, vol. 32, pp. 127–136.

KANE, ROBERT, 1996, The Significance of Free Will. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

KNOBE, J., and NICHOLS, S., eds., 2008, Experimental Philosophy. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

LEIBNIZ, GOTTFRIED, (1714) 1898, Monadology. In The Monadology and Other Philosophical Writings, Robert Latta, trans. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

LENAT, DOUGLAS B., and R. V. GUHA, 1990, Building Large Knowledge-Based Systems: Representation and Inference in the CYC Project. Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley.

LETTVIN, J. Y., U. MATURANA, W. MCCULLOCH, and W. PITTS, 1959, "What the Frog's Eye Tells the Frog's Brain." In Proceedings of the Institute of Radio Engineers, vol. 47, pp. 1940–1951.

LEVINE, JOSEPH, 1994, "Out of the Closet: A Qualophile Confronts Qualophobia." Philosophical Topics, vol. 22, pp. 107–126.

LEWIS, DAVID, 1978, "Truth in Fiction." American Philosophical Quarterly, vol. 15, pp. 37–46.

LLOYD, M., and DYBAS, H. S., 1966, "The Periodical Cicada Problem." Evolution, vol.20, pp. 132–149.

LLOYD MORGAN, CONWY, 1894, An Introduction to Comparative Psychology.London: W. Scott.

LUDLOW, PETER, YUJIN NAGASAWA, and DANIEL STOLJAR, eds., 2004, There's Something about Mary: Essays on Phenomenal Consciousness and Frank Jackson's Knowledge Argument. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press/Bradford Books.

MACKENZIE R. B., 1868, The Darwinian Theory of the Transmutation of Species Examined. London: Nisbet.

MAYNARD SMITH, JOHN, 1978, The Evolution of Sex. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

MCCLELLAND, JAY, DAVID RUMELHART, and THE PDP RESEARCH GROUP, 1986, Parallel Distributed Processing: Explorations in the Microstructure of Cognition, vol. 2. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.

MENABREA, LUIGI FEDERICO, 1842, "Sketch of the Analytic Engine Invented by Charles Babbage." In the Bibliothèque Universelle de Genève, no. 82 (October). Translated by Augusta Ada King, Countess of Lovelace, 1843, with notes, in Scientific Memoirs, vol. 3, pp.666–731.

MEYER, STEPHEN C., 2009, Signature in the Cell: DNA and the Evidence for Intelligent Design. New York: HarperOne.

MILLIKAN, RUTH, 1984, Language, Thought and Other Biological Categories. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.

MILLIKAN, RUTH, 1993, White Queen Psychology and Other Essays for Alice. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.

NAGEL, THOMAS, 1974, "What Is It Like to Be a Bat?" Philosophical Review, vol. 83, pp. 435–450.

NAGEL, THOMAS, 2009, Recommendation for Book of the Year. Times Literary Supplement, November 27.

NAGEL, THOMAS, 2010, Letter to the editor. Times Literary Supplement, January 1.

NEUGEBAUER, OTTO, 1989, "A Babylonian Lunar Ephemeris from Roman Egypt." In E. Leichty, M. de J. Ellis, and P. Gerardi, eds., A Scientific Humanist: Studies in Honor of Abraham Sachs. Philadelphia: Occasional Publications of the Samuel Noah Kramer Fund no. 9, pp. 301–304.

PINKER, STEVEN, 2002, The Blank Slate: The Modern Denial of Human Nature. New York: Viking.

POPEK, GERALD J., and ROBERT P. GOLDBERG, 1974, "Formal Requirements for Virtualizable Third Generation Architectures." Communications of the ACM, vol. 17, no. 7, pp.412–421. doi:10.1145/361011.361073. Available at http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/361011.361073.

POUNDSTONE, WILLIAM, 1985, The Recursive Universe: Cosmic Complexity and the Limits of Scientific Knowledge. New York: William Morrow.

PUTNAM, HILARY, 1975, "The Meaning of 'Meaning.'" In K. Gunderson, ed., Language, Mind and Knowledge. Minnesota Studies in the Philosophy of Science, vol. 7. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press. Reprinted in Putnam, 1975, Mind, Language and Reality (Philosophical Papers, vol. 2). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

QUINE, W. V. O., 1960, Word and Object. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.

QUINE, W. V. O., 1987, "Universal Library." In Quiddities: An Intermittently Philosophical Dictionary. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.

RAPOPORT, ANATOL, 1960, Fights, Games, and Debates. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.

RAPOPORT, ANATOL, 1961, "Three Modes of Conflict." Management Science, vol. 3, p.210.

RIDLEY, MATT, 1993, The Red Queen: Sex and the Evolution of Human Nature. New York: Macmillan.

RIDLEY, MATT, 2004, Nature via Nurture. London: Fourth Estate. Also published under the title The Agile Gene: How Nature Turns on Nurture. New York: HarperCollins.

ROSS, AMBER, 2013, "Inconceivable Minds." Philosophy PhD dissertation, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.

RUINA, ANDY, 2011, "Cornell Ranger, 2011, 4-Legged Bipedal Robot." ruina.tam.cornell.edu/research/topics/locomotion_and_robotics/ranger/Ranger 2011/.

RUMELHART, D. E., J. L. McCLELLAND, and THE PDP RESEARCH GROUP, 1986, Parallel Distributed Processing: Explorations in the Microstructure of Cognition, vol. 1. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.

RYDER, DAN, JUSTINE KINGSBURY, and KENNETH WILLIFORD, eds., 2013, Millikan and Her Critics. Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell.

SANFORD, DAVID, 1975, "Infinity and Vagueness." Philosophical Review, vol. 84, pp.520–535.

SCHÖNBORN, CHRISTOPH, 2005, "Finding Design in Nature." New York Times, July 7.

SEARLE, JOHN, 1980, "Minds, Brains and Programs." Behavioral and Brain Sciences, vol. 3, pp. 417–458.

SEARLE, JOHN, 1982, "The Myth of the Computer" (review of The Mind's I). New York Review of Books, vol. 29 (April 29).

SEARLE, JOHN, 1988, "Turing the Chinese Room." In T. Singh, ed., Synthesis of Science and Religion, Critical Essays and Dialogues. San Francisco: Bhaktivedanta Institute.

SELLARS, WILFRID, 1962, "Philosophy and the Scientific Image of Man." In Science, Perception and Reality. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.

SEUNG, SEBASTIAN, 2007, "The Once and Future Science of Neural Networks." Presented at the Society for Neuroscience meeting, San Diego, November 4.

SIEGEL, LEE, 1991, Net of Magic: Wonders and Deceptions in India. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

SIMS, KARL, 1994, Evolved Virtual Creatures. http://www.karlsims.com/evolved-virtual-creatures.html.

STRAWSON, GALEN, 2003, "Evolution Explains It All for You" (review of Dennett, 2003). New York Times, March 2.

STRAWSON, GALEN, 2010, "Your Move: The Maze of Free Will," The Stone, New York Times online, July 22, 2010. http://www.scribd.com/doc/86763712/Week-2-Strawson-The-Maze-of-Free-Will.

THOMPSON, EVAN, 2007, Mind in Life. Cambridge, Mass.: Belknap Press, Harvard University Press.

VOHS, KATHLEEN D., and JONATHAN W. SCHOOLER, 2008, "The Value of Believing in Free Will: Encouraging a Belief in Determinism Increases Cheating." Psychological Science, pp. 49–54.

VON NEUMANN, JOHN, 1966, Theory of Self-Reproducing Automata (Arthur Burks, ed.). Champaign-Urbana: University of Illinois Press.

VON NEUMANN, JOHN, and OSKAR MORGENSTERN, 1944, Theory of Games and Economic Behavior. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.

VON UEXKÜLL, JAKOB, (1934) 1957, "A Stroll through the Worlds of Animals and Men: A Picture Book of Invisible Worlds." In Claire H. Schiller, ed. and trans., Instinctive Behavior: The Development of a Modern Concept. New York: International Universities Press.

WANG, HAO, 1957, "A Variant to Turing's Theory of Computing Machines." Journal of the Association for Computing Machinery, pp. 63–92.

WIGGINS, DAVID, 1973, "Towards a Reasonable Libertarianism." In T. Honderich, ed., Essays on Freedom of Action. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, pp. 31–63.

WIMSATT, WILLIAM C., 1980, "Randomness and Perceived Randomness in Evolutionary Biology." Synthese, vol. 43, pp. 287–290.

WOLFE, TOM, 2000, "Sorry, But Your Soul Just Died." In Hooking Up. New York: Farrar, Straus & Giroux.

WOOLDRIDGE, DEAN, 1963, The Machinery of the Brain. New York: McGraw-Hill.

WRIGHT, ROBERT, 2000, Nonzero: The Logic of Human Destiny. New York: Pantheon.

ZAHAVI, A., 1987, "The Theory of Signal Selection and Some of Its Implications." In V.P. Delfino, ed., Bari, 9-14 April 1985. Bari: Adriatici Editrici, pp. 305–327.




