## 记忆时间

## 卡片

### 0101. 反常识卡——

这本书的主题核心，就是最大的反常识卡，并且注意时间脉络。

### 0201. 术语卡——

根据反常识，再补充三个证据——就产生三张术语卡。

### 0202. 术语卡——

### 0203. 术语卡——

### 0301. 人名卡——

根据这些证据和案例，找出源头和提出术语的人是谁——产生一张人名卡，并且分析他为什么牛，有哪些作品，生平经历是什么。

### 0401. 金句卡——

最后根据他写的非常震撼的话语——产生一张金句卡。

### 0501. 任意卡——

最后还有一张任意卡，记录个人阅读感想。

## 0501. A Web Crawler With asyncio Coroutines

Introduction. Classical computer science emphasizes efficient algorithms that complete computations as quickly as possible. But many networked programs spend their time not computing, but holding open many connections that are slow, or have infrequent events. These programs present a very different challenge: to wait for a huge number of network events efficiently. A contemporary approach to this problem is asynchronous I/O, or "async".

This chapter presents a simple web crawler. The crawler is an archetypal async application because it waits for many responses, but does little computation. The more pages it can fetch at once, the sooner it completes. If it devotes a thread to each in-flight request, then as the number of concurrent requests rises it will run out of memory or other thread-related resource before it runs out of sockets. It avoids the need for threads by using asynchronous I/O.

We present the example in three stages. First, we show an async event loop and sketch a crawler that uses the event loop with callbacks: it is very efficient, but extending it to more complex problems would lead to unmanageable spaghetti code. Second, therefore, we show that Python coroutines are both efficient and extensible. We implement simple coroutines in Python using generator functions. In the third stage, we use the full-featured coroutines from Python's standard "asyncio" library 1, and coordinate them using an async queue.

The Task. A web crawler finds and downloads all pages on a website, perhaps to archive or index them. Beginning with a root URL, it fetches each page, parses it for links to unseen pages, and adds these to a queue. It stops when it fetches a page with no unseen links and the queue is empty.

We can hasten this process by downloading many pages concurrently. As the crawler finds new links, it launches simultaneous fetch operations for the new pages on separate sockets. It parses responses as they arrive, adding new links to the queue. There may come some point of diminishing returns where too much concurrency degrades performance, so we cap the number of concurrent requests, and leave the remaining links in the queue until some in-flight requests complete.

