Vlatko Vedral.(2018).2024111Decoding-Reality.Oxford University Press => 0101


1001Children of the Aimless Chance: Randomness versus Determinism

In our search for the ultimate law, P, that allows us to encode the whole of reality we have come across a very fundamental obstacle. As Deutsch argued, P cannot be all-encompassing, simply because it cannot explain its own origins. We need a law more fundamental than P, from which P can be derived. But then this more fundamental law also needs to come from somewhere. This is like the metaphor of the painter in the lunatic asylum, who is trying to paint a picture of the garden he is sitting in. He can never find a way to completely include himself in the picture and gets caught in an infinite regression.

Does this mean we can never understand the whole of reality? Maybe so, given that any postulate that we start from needs its own explanation. Any law that underlies reality ultimately needs an a priori law. This puts us in a bit of a ‘Catch 22' situation. So, are we resigned to failure or is there a way out? Is there some fundamental level at which events have no a priori causes and we can break the infinite regression?

What does it mean for an event to have no a priori cause? This means that, even with all prior knowledge, we cannot infer that this event will take place. Furthermore, if there were genuinely acausal events in this Universe, this would imply a fundamentally random element of reality that cannot be reduced to anything deterministic.

This is a hugely controversial area, with various proponents of religion, science, and philosophy all having a quite contrasting set of views on this. Often people get very emotional over this question, as it has profound implications for us as human beings. Could it be that some events just don't have first causes? The British philosopher Bertrand Russell thought so. In Russell's famous debate with Reverend Copleston on the origin of the world, Copleston thought everything must have a cause, and therefore the world has a cause – and this cause is ultimately God himself. Copleston asks: ‘But your general point then, Lord Russell, is that it's illegitimate even to ask the question of the cause of the world?', to which Russell replies: ‘Yes, that's my position', and the whole debate reaches a dead-end as the two diametrically opposing views refused to compromise.

Interestingly, the quantum theory of information adds a novel twist to this millennia-old question of determinism versus randomness. This question is not just important for our understanding of reality, it is also important to us on a very personal level. The answer to this impacts on whether there is any room for genuinely free action in an ordered and structured Universe like ours. If the laws of reality govern everything, then even our actions would be subjugated and determined by them. This of course leaves us no room for the human element we call ‘free will' – a property that we strongly feel distinguishes us from non-living matter (and other animals). It is also seen as the basis of our consciousness.

Most of us in the West feel that determinism cannot completely govern reality because we are certain that we have free will, though what exactly this amounts to is far from uncontroversial. For the sake of discussion, let us define free will as the capacity for persons to control their actions in a manner not imposed by previous events, i.e. as containing some element of randomness as well as some element of determinism. So, if we accept the notion that we do indeed have free will, then we are already, in some sense, entertaining the idea that there may be a random element to reality (obviously not all elements of reality can be random, because this too would exclude any role for free will).

This still raises an intriguing question, simply because either of the two possible answers – ‘yes we do have free will', or ‘no we don't'–seem to lead to a contradiction. For example, suppose you answer with ‘yes, we have free will'. How would you demonstrate the validity of this statement? You would need to act in a way that would not be predetermined by anything. But how can this ever be, when whatever you do, can, in fact, be predetermined by something? To further qualify this argument, say you decide to act out of character, e.g. having an introverted personality you decide to start a conversation with a complete stranger on the street. But, the very fact that you decided to act contrary to your usual predisposition, seems itself to be fully predetermined. It is simply so by the fact that you determined that you would act out of character to prove free will. In this case perhaps in trying to prove free will, you are more likely to demonstrate that actually you have none. Your emotions could have been controlled by some outside factors which lead you to the conclusion that you must act out of character. If they were, all you are really trying to do is deterministically fight determinism, which is by definition a deterministic process!

The considerable difficulty in demonstrating free will conclusively lead us to postulate that perhaps we cannot have it. But this answer feels completely contrary to the whole of human psychology. Can nothing good that I do be attributed to me? Is it all predetermined by my genes or my history or my parents or social order or the rest of the Universe? Even worse, we tend to reward people for doing good deeds and punish them for bad ones. This would seem to be completely misconceived if humans did indeed not have any free will. How can you punish someone for doing something when they are not free to do otherwise? Is our whole moral and judicial system based on the illusion of free will? This just feels wrong, although there is no logical reason why free will is necessary.

That we seem to have no way of proving that there is free will was poetically stated by the famous biologist Thomas Henry Huxley: ‘What proof is there that brutes are other than a superior race of marionettes, which eat without pleasure, cry without pain, desire nothing, know nothing, and only simulate intelligence?'

Free will lies somewhere between randomness and determinism which seem to be at the opposite extremes in reality. It's clear that neither pure randomness or pure determinism would leave any room for free will. If the world is completely random, then by definition we have no control over what will happen, and if the world is completely deterministic we also similarly have no control over what will happen as it would all be pre-scripted. So you are stuck between a rock and a hard place.

But are randomness and determinism actually opposite extremes when it comes to defining reality? Are they mutually exclusive, meaning that they cannot both exist within the same framework? Our latest model of physics, quantum theory, suggests that there is a way of combining the two. Every quantum event is fundamentally random, yet we find that large objects behave deterministically. How can this be?

The answer is that sometimes when we combine many random things, a more predictable outcome can emerge. This may seem paradoxical at first (shouldn't lots of random things give you something even more random?) but this is not necessarily the case.

Imagine you toss a coin 100 times. Each of the outcomes is very uncertain and you'd have difficulty predicting it. Your success would not be better than 50%, which amounts to just random guessing. But imagine that instead of betting on individual outcomes, you in fact bet on the number of heads and tails when 100 tosses have finished. This is much easier, since 50 heads and 50 tails is what you would expect if the coin was fair. So, each toss is random, but overall a predictable pattern emerges.

In physics we encounter this all the time. Every atom in a magnet can be thought of as a mini-magnet but its behaviour is very erratic. A single atom's magnetic axis is impossible to predict, unless we apply a strong external influence to align it. However, even without this external influence, all these randomly aligned atoms can together still produce a magnet with a clearly defined north and south. Therefore, a deterministic event can emerge out of a random one.

Randomness at the microscopic level therefore does not always propagate to the macroscopic level. It is perfectly plausible that in spite of quantum mechanics being our most accurate description of Nature, the world of large objects – the one that matters to us humans most in our everyday lives – is fully deterministic. This would imply that even though the world is random at the microscopic level, there is still no free will at the macroscopic level.

But what exactly does it mean to be random? We think of tossing a coin and observing the outcome (heads or tails) as a random process. It is random because before we observe the outcome it has an equal chance of being heads or tails. And it is very difficult to predict the outcome. But what if we knew all about the coin? These would include its weight, exactly how it was tossed, and any relevant properties of the air around it. Then Newton's laws tell us that we should be able to predict the outcome of each toss. Therefore, based on classical physics, randomness is superficial. There is no fundamental randomness once we have all the information.

Quantum physics, with its peculiar blend of randomness and determinism, obviously makes our debate about these topics far richer. Uncertainty in classical physics, unlike in quantum physics, is not fundamental but simply arises out of our ignorance of certain facts. George Boole expresses this idea clearly: ‘Probability is expectation founded upon partial knowledge. A perfect acquaintance with all the circumstances affecting the occurrence of an event would change expectation into certainty, and leave neither room nor demand for a theory of probabilities.' In quantum physics however this statement does not hold. One of the most fundamental and defining features of quantum theory is that even when we have all information about a system, the outcome is still probabilistic. According to quantum theory, reality can be fundamentally random and not just apparently random (i.e. where we may be missing some information).

Here is a very simple experiment that is a quantum mechanical equivalent of tossing a coin. Imagine a photon, which as we said is a particle of light, encountering a beam-splitter. Recall that a beam-splitter is just a mirror that has a certain silver coating on it, so that we can tune the probability with which the photon is reflected or transmitted. Let us say that these probabilities are made equal, so that we have the exact equivalent of a fair coin.

Just as a coin, when tossed, can land heads or tails, so the photon impinging on a beam-splitter can go through, or be reflected. And, as far as all experiments indicate, the beam-splitter experiment is completely random. Each time a photon is sent to a beam-splitter, we can in no way predict its path subsequently. Reflection or transmission are equally likely and occur randomly.

But now I would like to make a distinction between a coin and a photon. The behaviour of a coin is random, not fundamentally, but because it is unpredictable. The behaviour of a photon is not just unpredictable, it is genuinely random. What can this possibly mean?

The coin is governed by the laws of classical physics. If we knew the exact initial conditions of the coin toss, namely the speed and angle, then we would in principle be able to fully predict the outcome. But it may take us a very long time to be able to compute the outcome. Perhaps it takes years or longer to do this. Nevertheless, the equations that govern the coin dynamics are fully deterministic and in principle can be solved to tell us the outcome. Therefore, the coin toss only appears random. It is really deterministic, but difficult to predict.

Now let's consider the situation with the photon and the beam-splitter. Here the equations are quantum, and they are also deterministic. The indeterminism of quantum mechanics manifests itself only through deliberate or non-deliberate (environmental) measurements. When the system is undisturbed by either, we have a clear and well-defined deterministic view of it as described by the Schrödinger equation. And what this equation tells us is that after the beam-splitter, the photon has both gone through and has been reflected. Yes. Both possibilities occur in reality. The photon is now in two places at once. It is behind the beam-splitter, having gone through, and in front of it, having been reflected. Unlike the coin toss, it is very simple to solve quantum equations to reach this conclusion. But the conclusion seems paradoxical!

And what happened to randomness? It comes in through the backdoor. Imagine that we now want to check where the photon is, i.e. we want to make a deliberate measurement. If we put detectors behind and in front of the beam-splitter they will then record the presence or absence of the photon. Let us say that the detection, when it happens, is amplified to a loud click. What happens in the actual experiments? The detectors click randomly.

There is absolutely no way to tell which detector will click in each particular run. This randomness is genuine; it is not just unpredictable as a coin toss is. Why? How do we know that the equation telling us that the photon is on both sides before it is measured cannot be supplemented by another deterministic law to tell us what happens when the photon is detected?

The reason why we know that the ‘coin toss type' randomness is not involved is as follows. Suppose that instead of measuring the photon after the first beam-splitter we put another beam-splitter after the first one instead. What happens then? If the behaviour of the photon was classical, then it would be deterministic at both beam-splitters, but the outcome would be even more difficult to predict. We would therefore expect the photon to have random outcomes at the second beam-splitter too. Half of the time it should be detected in front of it and half of the time behind it.

But this is not what happens in the lab. In an actual experiment, the photon now deterministically always ends up behind the second beam-splitter. So, two quantum random processes have, in a way, cancelled out to give something deterministic. And this is something that cannot happen classically. Imagine that you toss a fair coin twice and you find out that it always comes out heads both times. But when you toss it once sometimes it is heads and sometimes it is tails. This could, of course, never happen. But in the case of a photon it does. This is why we believe that there is something very different in the behaviour of the photon to what any classical system would do.

So what have we learnt? We've learnt that all elementary quantum events are in fact fundamentally random. But this of course doesn't mean that a reality built on these random events must necessarily be random. We have seen how randomness and determinism can co-exist and moreover determinism can emerge from random origins. This gives us some insight into the origins and nature of reality.

There is a beautiful quantum protocol that illustrates how randomness and determinism can work hand in hand to produce a stunning outcome. Think Star Trek and the teleportation chamber. Does anyone actually believe that teleportation is possible? No? Well you'd better believe it! Teleportation ‘dematerializes' an object positioned at a location A only to make it reappear at a distant location B at some later time. OK, so quantum teleportation differs slightly, because we are not teleporting the whole object but just its quantum information from particle A to particle B, but the principle is the same (after all, the whole thesis of this book is that we are all just bits of information).

As all quantum particles are indistinguishable anyway, this amounts to ‘real' teleportation. What I mean by this is that all electrons, for example, have identical properties (mass, charge) and the only distinguishing feature is how they spin. Given that all other properties of two electrons are the same, if we also manage to encode one electron spin into another, then we can consider this a successful transfer of quantum information between the two. In other words, the second electron becomes an identical copy of the first, and the two are now indistinguishable. This is true for all particles such as protons, atoms, and so on.

One way of performing teleportation (and certainly the way portrayed in various science fiction movies, e.g. The Fly) is first to learn all the properties of that object (i.e. get all the information about what makes that object) and then send this information as a classical string of data to location B where the object is then re-created.

One problem with this proposal is that, if we have a single electron and we don't know its spin, we cannot determine it because this would require us to make a measurement thereby invariably damaging the original quantum information in the spin. So it would seem that the laws of quantum mechanics prohibit teleportation of a single quantum system (unless we know its state in advance).

However, it will turn out that there is no need to learn the state of the system in order to teleport it. All we need to do is use mutual quantum information, of the same sort that exists in a quantum computer. This provides super-correlation between locations A and B (technically known as quantum entanglement), so that quantum information can be transferred. Even though the quantum measurement driving the teleportation is still random, this can be overcome by sending some auxiliary classical information from A to B. The actual measurement outcome at A would be communicated to B and this could even be done over a standard telephone line. After the teleportation is completed, the original state of the particle at A is destroyed. This then illustrates how teleportation at the quantum level can actually be performed – and this in spite of the intrinsic randomness.

Currently we can teleport only individual atoms and photons over only a couple of metres. The basic principle has therefore been experimentally verified, first by Anton Zeilinger's research group at the University of Vienna, and independently by Francesco de Martini's group at the University of Rome, but the question still remains if we can ever use this to teleport larger objects and ultimately humans. With humans things could get even more complicated. If we faithfully teleported every atom in your body, would that necessarily be the same as teleporting you? In other words, is your body all there is to you? The answer to this is that we really have no idea!

Now, in a more general sense, in order to distinguish superficial (classical) from real (quantum) randomness we really need a clearer measure in order to quantify the difference. Interestingly enough, one such measure does exist, and although it is closely related to the Shannon entropy, it has quite a different motivation. To understand why the Shannon entropy may itself not be so useful as a measure of randomness, consider the following example.

A typical random process as indicated is a coin toss. It generates a sequence of heads (H) and tails (T). Typically, after 10 tosses, say, we expect to have something looking like HHTHTTTHTH. We much less expect to see something like HHHHHHHHHH. The first sequence just looks like one that should come out of a random source, like a coin. The second looks too ordered to be genuinely random. We might also think of the second one as being less likely. But this is a mistake.

Here we therefore have a problem. Since heads and tails have an equal probability of one-half, any sequence of heads and tails is as likely to come up as any other sequence (people playing the lottery rarely appreciate this fact: 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 is as likely as 2, 3, 17, 30, 41, 45). It is true that a sequence with half heads and half tails is more likely than the one with all heads. But this is because there are more such sequences: there is only one sequence involving all heads, while there are about a thousand sequences with 50–50 heads/tails (HHHHHTTTTT, or HTHTHTHTHT, or TTTHHTTHHH, and so on).

Any particular random sequence is as likely as any other. But, still, we have a strong feeling that while the sequence HHTHTTTHTH looks random, the sequence HHHHHHHHHH, appears to be very orderly. Their probability seems not to be able to capture this basic difference since both are equally likely (or unlikely; the probability is about one in a thousand for either). And this is why Shannon's entropy fails to quantify randomness, as it is based only on probabilities.

The measure used to solve the problem of quantifying randomness was ultimately introduced by a Russian mathematician, Andrey Kolmogorov, in the late 1950s. His solution is in some sense very operational – or, better still, physical. His solution to randomness was as follows. How random a sequence is depends on how difficult it is to produce this sequence. Produce it with what? Answer: a computer.

Imagine writing a program for your computer to generate a sequence of heads and tails. The sequence of all heads (HHHHHHHHHH) only needs one instruction: ‘print 10 heads'. But a sequence HTHHHTTHTH cannot be generated as easily. In fact the program probably just needs to say ‘print the sequence HTHHHTTHTH'. Therefore, when we have a random looking sequence, the program to generate it is at least as long as the sequence itself (in our case it is longer since it requires additional instructions, e.g. ‘initialize computer, print the sequence, end program', etc. but this will be a marginal difference when the string is very long anyway). However, when something is orderly, the program can be much shorter. The quantity that tells us by how much orderly things can be compressed to shorter programs is known as Kolmogorov's complexity.

Are there any problems with this definition? If we are not careful it seems that different computers could give us different estimates of how random something is. Fortunately we remind ourselves of Turing's notion of the universal computer, a computer that can simulate any other. So, to avoid such issues, Kolmogorov suggested calculating the Kolmogorov complexity using this universal computer.

Using Kolmogorov's ideas, we can re-examine the difference between classical superficial randomness and quantum fundamental randomness. We said that the sequence of tosses of a coin of the type HHHTTTHTTHH is random because it cannot be given a shorter program to generate it. Imagine having all the information that fully captures this coin toss (e.g. the relative weight difference between the head and tail face of the coin, speed of rotation, height thrown to, etc.). With all this information fixed, to the correct level of precision, we could write a program that could generate the sequence for any number of coin tosses. This is because classical physics is fully deterministic. The length of this program in classical physics would necessarily be shorter than doing the coin tosses themselves (for a large number of coin tosses). In the quantum case, this would not be so. Given the problem of predicting the sequence of photon clicks in a detector (our quantum coin toss) the program used to describe the sequence could only describe it by actually running each experiment individually. Therefore, the program would have to be at least the same length as the sequence of detector clicks it is trying to describe. There is no short-cut!

An intriguing possibility now emerges. Can we apply Kolmogorov's logic to understand the origins of reality? Can we say that our laws that describe reality are exactly this – an attempt to understand the dynamics of the Universe and reduce its complexity? In this way, the laws themselves (in physics, biology, economics, sociology) could all be seen as short programs describing the makeup of reality. For example, in physics, rather than running each and every experiment (i.e. writing the whole program) we can write a shortened program which only uses the current laws of physics to predict the outcome of each experiment. This latter program would hence be significantly more efficient than the program that actually runs all the experiments individually. In this way we can consider our duty as scientists to find the shortest program that represents reality. So let us look into how this reduction in complexity is achieved in science.

To understand what exactly is at stake, we first need to understand the logic of science, physics in particular. This was something that the philosopher Karl Popper devoted his life to. His way of understanding science will be the key to understanding reality in my final chapter. So let us summarize it here.

When Popper was growing up in the 1920s, physics was reaching its peak, but some other disciplines started to emerge, which are now known as social sciences. Sigmund Freud was pioneering psychology (through psychoanalysis) and sociology and political sciences were also emerging. While some people would be happy to call social sciences by the name of ‘soft' sciences (as opposed to hard, fact-based science, such as physics), Popper was altogether very concerned with attaching the name science to anything like psychoanalysis.

His principal aim was to devise a criterion for calling something a science in the first place. The crucial idea that occurred to him is the following. While it is easy to falsify a physical theory (just do an experiment whose results clearly contradict the theory, and quantum experiments were a shining example of falsifying classical physics in Popper's time), it is not so easy to falsify a psychological theory.

How many times have you heard the remark that someone is not confident because their mother did not love them? Then again, you also hear that others are confident precisely because their mothers did not love them and they had to rely on themselves more. And so here is the problem. The theory ‘his mother did not love him' seems to be able to explain too much. So much so that it can be used to justify two diametrically opposing facts, someone being confident and another person not being confident. This means that such a theory can never be falsified, or shown to be wrong, in practice.

The famous eighteenth-century Scottish philosopher David Hume was particularly bothered by non-falsifiability of some claims (psychoanalysis didn't exist in his time, he was much more bothered by philosophy and religion). He phrased it as follows. Any number of white swans we see in the world cannot prove to us the conjecture that ‘all swans are white'. However, a sight of one single black swan is enough to destroy it. And so it is with science. Newton's physics had been tested for 200 years and always found to be correct. But one test in the late nineteenth century – in the shape of blackbody radiation – was enough to destroy it. The black body was the black swan of physics, destroying the hypothesis that all physics obeys classical physics. Of course this does not mean that classical physics is of no use to us whatsoever, it just means that there must now be a new theory (i.e. quantum mechanics) that takes into account classical physics plus its black swan. In contrast to a concrete statement that can be falsified, e.g. ‘all swans in this river are white', stands a statement like ‘God works in mysterious ways' – I mean, how the bleep are you going to disprove that?

How can we therefore be sure about anything that comes from science? We cannot. But, rather than this being a problem, Popper thought that this was the whole point of science! Namely, a theory is only genuine if there is a way of falsifying it! If under no circumstances can you disprove your theory (i.e. create an experiment to rule it out), then this theory is worthless as far as knowledge is concerned because you can never test it. Popper therefore turned a seemingly negative feature of science (the fact that any theory could be proven wrong) into its most fundamental and necessary feature. It is through centuries of refutations, falsifying (i.e. refuting), and improving on theories (i.e. conjecturing), that science has progressed to where it is today.

Let us see if we can interpret Popper's logic within the context of information theory. Once a theory is established by a few experiments, we then start to gain more confidence in its validity (though we may be, and usually are, ultimately proven wrong). As a result we attribute a higher chance to the theory passing the next test. If the theory passes it, the principles of information would say that this is a low-information event. The reason is that the higher the probability of an event, the smaller the surprise when the event happens.

As our confidence grows, the probability we attribute to the theory being falsified becomes smaller and smaller. In the current experiments testing quantum mechanics, not many in the physics community expect quantum mechanics to fail. But this is precisely why it would be a great shock if it did. So, falsifying something usually carries far more information – both emotional and physical – than confirming it.

Any information in physics comes from the scientific method Popper called ‘conjectures and refutations'. But even this method can be seen as a form of information processing. This will result in a rigorous and well-defined statement of Occam's razor. We can think of scientific theories as programs run on a universal computer, with the output being the result of whatever experiment we are trying to model. We say that our theory is powerful, if we can compress all sorts of observations into very few equations. The more we are able to compress, the better we believe we can understand something. Because then from very few laws we can generate the whole of reality.

Occam's razor just says that if there are many theories that explain something, then we should choose the shortest one as the correct one. The shortest description of Nature that generates all possible observations is to be preferred over a very long description. To quote Leibniz, whom we met in relation to one of the proofs of the existence of God, ‘God has chosen that which is the most simple in hypotheses and the most rich in phenomena'. This statement would imply that the information in the Universe is highly compressible into a few simple laws.

But now we face an interesting question. Any theory we come up with will be finite, namely it will contain a fixed (hopefully small) set of rules. And this means – as was first fully realized within information theory by Gregory Chaitin, an American mathematician – that it can only produce a finite set of results. In other words, there will be many experimental outcomes that could not be compressed within the theory. And this effectively implies that they are random. This was also realized by Leibniz who stated: ‘But when a rule is extremely complex, that which conforms to it passes as random'. This perfectly encapsulates the Kolmogorov view of randomness: when the rule is as complicated as the outcome it needs to produce, then the outcome must be seen as complex or, in other words, random.

Following this logic quantum randomness can be encapsulated in two principles, as first argued by the Italian physicist Carlo Rovelli. One of them is borrowed from classical information and simply states that the most elementary quantum system cannot hold more than one bit of information. This is almost self-evident as by definition a bit is the smallest unit of information. The second principle is that we can always obtain new information. This principle, when combined with the first, captures the fundamental randomness we see in quantum events. The only way we can obtain new information when we seemingly have all information, is if this new information is random. Can it be that this is just a restatement of the fact that a finite number of axioms can only lead to a finite number of outcomes? If this was so, the implications would be amazing.

There is still a school of thought that views randomness in quantum theory as due to its incompleteness, i.e. due to our lack of knowledge of a more detailed deterministic underlying theory. However, if we view the growth of our knowledge in physics through compression, it may suggest to us that randomness is inherent in the Universe, and therefore it must be part of any physical description of reality. Randomness could simply be there because our description of reality is always (by construction) finite and anything requiring more information than that would appear to be random (since our description could not predict it).

This would mean that randomness in quantum physics is far from unexpected – in fact according to this logic it is actually essential. Furthermore, it would mean that whatever theory – if any – superseded quantum physics, it would still have to contain some random features. This is a very profound conclusion. Given that physics is always evolving, having fundamental randomness sets a serious constraint on any new theory.

Having the potential to be wrong is what Popper identified as the key aspect of scientific knowledge. However, this should also be true of any other form of knowledge (philosophical, psychological, religious, historical, artistic, you name it). In this respect useful scientific knowledge is the same as the financial gain in betting or stock markets. If there is no risk then there is nothing to gain – i.e. no free lunch! It's not just scientific knowledge or economic profit that grows in this way, any useful information within whatever context you can describe, always grows in this way.

Science is therefore just a form of betting on future outcomes. The idea of representing our uncertainty about the Universe through gambling was, in fact, already suggested by the famous German philosopher Immanuel Kant in his Critique of Pure Reason, as long ago as 1781. Kant equated betting with the pragmatic belief in the validity of our theories. The logarithmic scoring rule (so central to Shannon) is, in a sense, a practical implementation of this philosophical suggestion.

The interplay between randomness and determinism in fact propagates throughout the book. For Popper, randomness lies in making conjectures in science, and determinism in refuting these conjectures by deliberate experimentation. This was, according to him, the only way to secure information about the world, i.e. knowledge. But in other elements of reality, useful information also emerges in exactly the same way.

For example, consider the process of evolution of biological information. Biologists mainly think of information processing in living systems as created through evolution. Evolution has two components, one is the random mutation in the genetic code and the second is deterministic natural selection by the environment of this new feature. In this way, evolution of biological information is seen to emerge analogously to creating any useful scientific knowledge.

The same is true in economics, where the central goal is to understand and predict market behaviour. Whether it is economic policy, or a simple financial investment decision, any conjectured strategy will be played out in the market, and therefore falsified or confirmed.

We have also argued that social dynamics is another form of information processing. And furthermore the level of development of a society may be viewed as synonymous with its capacity to process information. Randomness appears between elements of a society, whereas through interaction with one another, at the collective level we see deterministic characteristics through all sorts of phase transitions that societies undergo. It is probably not an accident that societies that have applied the method of conjectures and refutations more vigorously have had the opportunity to develop faster.

In physics, randomness was seen to be crucial in the concept of heat, and in fact the whole Universe was seen as evolving towards the state of maximal entropy (maximal randomness or disorder). The deterministic part of this process was to use available information to design schemes to extract useful work efficiently. The whole of thermodynamics can be seen as a battle between deliberate Maxwell's demons, trying to extract order from disorder, and natural randomizing processes.

Everywhere we look we see underlying bits of information. Furthermore this information always obeys the same evolution through randomness and determinism, independently of context. So can a combination of randomness and determinism produce all information and everything else we see around us?

Key points

Randomness and determinism together can be seen to underlie every aspect of reality.

This is linked to the age-old question of free will; a question that has entertained us since the days of Ancient Greece.

Through a series of conjectures and refutations we can now see how knowledge evolves.

Quantum mechanics opens the door to genuine randomness (i.e. events which, at their most fundamental level, have no underlying cause).

Kolmogorov captured the essence of randomness in that a collection of outcomes from a random process cannot be generated in any simpler way than by actually running that process (i.e. you just have to suck it and see).