Vlatko Vedral.(2018).2024111Decoding-Reality.Oxford University Press => 0101





PART TWO

Up until now we have been discussing various aspects of reality in terms of information. We have seen how information theory provides a powerful description of various different aspects of reality. In deriving his theory, Shannon was just trying to describe information in terms of a very specific problem, that of communication between two parties, Alice and Bob. He didn't care a jot about the applicability of his theory beyond that problem, but as it turns out this is exactly where the power of his theory lies. Did Shannon get lucky or is there something more fundamental about his approach that makes information theory so widely applicable?

At its core, information theory asks the most fundamental question that can be asked: Is event A different (distinguishable) from event B? But why is this so fundamental, you may ask? Well, think of it this way; try to imagine learning or describing anything where you cannot distinguish between the correct answer and an incorrect answer. It cannot be done! You are essentially blind. Without distinguishability we cannot hope to have any understanding of our Universe if everything looks identical. If we consider the first half of this book we have already seen this concept of distinguishability applied in many different guises. In biology for example, DNA distinguishes between four bases to replicate itself. In thermodynamics, Maxwell's Demon needs to distinguish between fast-moving and slow-moving particles in order to create a temperature differences between two sides of a container. In a casino, you're betting on at least two different scenarios and it is your understanding of the probabilities that determines your profit. In sociology we were making a distinction between whether an individual is liberal or not, which has an impact on how likely it is that you stay in your neighborhood.

This fundamental concept of distinguishability between two different states is basically what Shannon referred to as a bit of information. A bit is the most fundamental measure of information; where you have more than two outcomes, you simply use more bits to distinguish them all.

Of course it makes no sense to talk about the distinguishability of two events if only one of the events ever occurs. Therefore we also need to know the probability with which each of the events occur. Because we can distinguish between more than one outcome, time after time, we can then generate the probabilities for these outcomes. The probability of an event gives us the expectation of an event occurring, and this is what allows us to quantify how surprised we are when the event happens. If we are expecting something with high probability we are not so surprised when it happens (e.g. the Sun rises) and when it doesn't happen, we are a little more surprised.

All of this is so natural and basic that even if you sat in your armchair and thought about it (albeit with a fair modicum of hindsight) you find yourself leaning towards a similar framework to that which Shannon proposed. From this perspective, I think you'd agree that Shannon's concept of information seems quite intuitive.

So are we done? Armed with Shannon's information theory can we now generalize any problem in terms of information? Well, not quite. While the key to wide applicability of Shannon's information theory is that it has the same logical foundation as our everyday physical, biological, social, and economical phenomena, it doesn't quite capture everything. Shannon's information theory boils down to events based on Boolean logic, i.e. for an event with several outcomes, each outcome happens or does not happen – if you roll a die you can either get 3 or not (you can't roll a 3 and a 6 at the same time). Note that though this logical foundation seems an entirely trivial truism to the reader, we will see that our latest understanding of the Universe tells us otherwise.

This event-based Boolean logic is also very characteristic of the early models of physics. In the same way that Shannon's information theory is based on the fundamental idea of a definite outcome (we only expect to see event A or event B occurring, but never the two together), our early physical models follow suit. The early models of physics, usually called classical or sometimes Newtonian physics, are also responsible for the vast majority of our technological progress to date (think: electromagnetism, energy manipulation, hydrodynamics, and telecommunications). It is the kind of physics that we studied at school, where each particle has a well-defined charge, position, velocity, and mass. Classical physics argues that if we knew these properties for all the particles in the Universe, we could determine the outcome of any future event, in other words the Universe is fully deterministic. In fact there has been an imaginary creature conceived for this very purpose. Laplace's demon, as he is affectionately referred to, knows all the properties for each and every particle in the Universe and as such is able to determine any event (akin to being able to see into the future). To this demon, the concept of information is completely redundant, he has no need for it – as the demon already knows with certainty what will occur. What a boring Universe this demon lives in. Samuel Johnson would agree: ‘such is the state of life that none are happy but by the anticipation of change'.

Fortunately, though, even if this deterministic Universe is boring and predictable to Laplace's demon, scientific progress, and physics in particular, is still full of surprises. Physics is a very dynamic activity, and as soon as we are set on a model to describe reality, along comes an experiment that completely challenges our view. In this way, physics evolves through time, taking into account more and more information, new experiments and insights to produce a better and better description of reality. So the question is, what has made classical physics ‘classical'? I mean who's the new kid on the block?

Our latest understanding is that certain aspects of reality are more accurately described by a higher approximation of physics known as ‘quantum theory'. With quantum theory the notion of a deterministic Universe fails, events always occur with probabilities regardless of how much information you have. Hence Laplace's demon cannot even exist in principle, let alone in practice (i.e. there is no truth in a crystal ball or the Greek oracle at Delphi). It is not just physics that is full of surprises, the Universe intrinsically is full of surprises.

So what does our new understanding of physics, the introduction of quantum theory, mean for Shannon's information theory? Shannon didn't build his information theory to include the oddity of quantumness, so if we are really to describe the whole Universe, does the fundamentality of Shannon's information theory still hold? Yes, but with a twist. Distinguishability and probabilities are still central even in quantum theory, however the concept of distinguishability needs to be enlarged to account for the bizarreness of quantum effects. And, when we expand Shannon's information theory, we find that there are many additional elements of reality that had been completely hidden from us.

In the second part of this book we present and apply an enlarged information theory, quantum information theory, to present a number of novel features that couldn't be described purely by Shannon's information theory. Quantum information theory can be approximated by Shannon's information theory in certain cases, including the cases covered in the first part of the book. In the second part of the book we no longer have this luxury; a full quantum exposition is necessary. This leads us to some fascinating new features of information processing, such as the ability to teleport information across vast distances, the ability to compute faster than we ever thought imaginable, and to communicate so securely that no amount of eavesdropping or computing power can ever decipher our communications. However, the real surprise is how our understanding of the Universe is dramatically shaken and leads us to find new insight into its very origin.

Former US Secretary of State, Donald Rumsfeld, unbeknown to him, paraphrases the transformation from Shannon's to quantum information theory beautifully when he tells us that some of the unknown unknowns have now become known unknowns or even known knowns. This does not exclude the fact that there may be many more unknown unknowns, i.e. we still don't know what we don't know. Essentially, there's still much to look forward to!

Fortunately the logic of quantum mechanics is not quite as confusing as Rumsfeld's speech. In Part Two I show that it is possible to describe quantum information in a clear and concise manner to fit our latest description of reality.



0801Quantum Schmuntum: Lights, Camera, Action!

Spring 2005, whilst sitting at my desk in the physics department at Leeds University, marking yet more exam papers, I was interrupted by a phone call. Interruptions were not such a surprise at the time, a few weeks previously I had published an article on quantum theory in the popular science magazine, New Scientist, and had since been inundated with all sorts of calls from the public. Most callers were very enthusiastic, clearly demonstrating a healthy appetite for more information on this fascinating topic, albeit occasionally one or two either hadn't read the article, or perhaps had read into it a little too much. Comments ranging from ‘Can quantum mechanics help prevent my hair loss?' to someone telling me that they had met their twin brother in a parallel Universe, were par for the course, and I was getting a couple of such questions each day. At Oxford we used to have a board for the most creative questions, especially the ones that clearly demonstrated the person had grasped some of the principles very well, but had then taken them to an extreme, and often, unbeknown to them, had violated several other physical laws on the way. Such questions served to remind us of the responsibility we had in communicating science – to make it clear and approachable but yet to be pragmatic. As a colleague of mine often said – sometimes working with a little physics can be more dangerous than working with none at all.

‘Hello Professor Vedral, my name is Jon Spooner, I'm a theatre director and I am putting together a play on quantum theory', said the voice as I picked up the phone. ‘I am weaving elements of quantum theory into the play and we want you as a consultant to verify whether we are interpreting it accurately'. Totally stunned for at least a good couple of seconds, I asked myself, ‘This guy is doing what?' Had I misheard? A play on quantum theory? Anyway it occurred to me that there might be an appetite for something like this, given how successful the production of Copenhagen, a play by Michael Freyn, had been a few years back. Copenhagen was based on an actual meeting that took place in 1941 between two of the early fathers of quantum theory, the Danish Niels Bohr and the German Werner Heisenberg. In Copenhagen (the play) the efforts to clarify or communicate the subtleties of quantum theory were notable but this was not its purpose, so Spooner's play would provide a new spin on things. So I thought, why not? After exchanging a few details we agreed to meet the next morning to discuss it a little more.

One of the attractions of finding out more was that so often science and the arts are viewed as quite antagonistic to one another and it was interesting to find out how someone was trying to bridge that divide. It was also helpful that the building where they were rehearsing was only 200 yards away from my office (and who says theoretical physicists aren't practical!).

The following morning I dropped off my bags at the office and made my way to the theatre to see Jon. The theatre was located in one of the most historic sites on the east side of the university. On the same site is the Trinity St David's congregational church, built by G.F. Danby in 1898, which represents one of the rarest and prettiest examples of gothic architecture in central Leeds. It is a sterling indictment to the enterprise of the university that this church is now home to an impressive student theatre as well as one of the finest nightclubs in Leeds (Loiners will know it as Halo)! Some have commented that this seems to be a part of an ongoing trend, that actors and clubbers appear to be the main groups interested in organized religion these days.

On my first visit, I was a little nervous, not knowing much about theatre and what they expected from me. I was thinking that perhaps I could, in the worst case, just reel off an introductory lecture on quantum theory and brought along some printed diagrams just in case. As I entered the main hall I found several guys huddled in a corner, deep in active discussion. As they looked up, they saw me and I waved back. ‘Ah Professor Vedral, come in and sit down. We have a few questions for you'. It seemed likely that my presence was related to whatever they were discussing, as the mere sight of me caused a decent amount of stirring and a wholehearted diversion of attention. Dispensing with formalities they got straight down to business and asked me about the plausibility of a character in the play who was required to be in two places at the same time. They said that they had heard a little bit about quantum theory and teleportation and they wanted to know if this was possible.

While a couple of the crew seemed to have bought into this idea, several were still sceptical as to whether there was any basis in quantum theory for such a preposterous notion. However, all were understandably quite shocked when I revealed that this was part of my everyday work (though much to their disappointment I had to clarify that I was not experimenting with humans).

I went on to explain that at the heart of quantum physics is the concept of indeterminism. Indeterminism is linked to the fact that an object can indeed be in more than one state at any one time (e.g. you toss a coin and it can give you both heads and tails at the same time). In technical parlance this is known as a quantum superposition. The main difficulty with understanding and teaching quantum mechanics is exactly this counterintuitive and paradoxical nature – people just don't buy it first time around (even Einstein went to his grave certain that this was wrong).

In physics there is a very simple experiment demonstrating superposition and this is what I went on to describe to the theatre crew. Imagine a photon, which is a particle of light, encountering a beam-splitter. A beam-splitter is just a mirror that has a silver coating on it and, by varying the amount of silver, we can tune the probability with which the photon is reflected or transmitted. Let us say that these probabilities are made equal, so that we have the exact equivalent of a fair coin, i.e. half the time the coin will give heads (H) and half the time the coin will give tails (T).

Just as a coin, when tossed, can land heads or tails, so the photon when it hits a beam-splitter can with equal probability either go through or be reflected (i.e. reflection or transmission are equally likely). The experiment contains two sets of beam-splitters, one after the other, where the resultant beam from the first beam-splitter is recombined in the second beam-splitter. Imagine this experiment being analogous to tossing a coin twice. In such a case all four outcomes are equally likely, i.e. we have HH, HT, TH, TT. Interestingly, with the photon we only ever see one result, the other results never occur. So how does this trick work?

Imagine that the photon definitely passes through the first beam-splitter, it then enters the second beam-splitter via a specific path. If it does not pass through the beam-splitter, and is instead reflected, then it enters the second beam-splitter via a different path. On top of this, we don't know which of these scenarios happened, but we know one of them must be true. At the second beam-splitter, whichever path it enters from, the photon similarly passes through the beam-splitter or is reflected. Therefore after the two beam-splitters our photon has four possible scenarios: RR (reflected, reflected), PR (passes through, reflected), RP, or PP. As you can see, this is equivalent to the coin tossing scenarios where after two tosses we have similar results. You know the results of the coin toss are definitely one of the four options, but until you look you just don't know which one. Amazingly though, this is not what is observed when we use a real photon rather than a coin. The real photon always comes out the same way from the second beam-splitter. But surely this is impossible?

If the photon either definitely passed through or was reflected after the first beam-splitter, then we should expect the same after the second, i.e. 50/50 reflection or passing through. Given that this never happens means that we need to re-evaluate what happened at the first beam-splitter. Strangely the only conclusion that we can reach is that it must actually be reflected and pass through at the same time. So what I am really saying is that the photon can actually exist in two spatial locations at the same time. This is the only way two beam-splitters can be combined to give the same outcome, time and time again.

The theatre crew, like the founders of quantum mechanics, were completely baffled by this. But, the fact that a quantum object exists in many different locations at the same time is experimentally beyond any doubt. Since the birth of quantum mechanics there have been numerous different ways of confirming this. I went on to explain further evidence showing how a photon can exist in two different locations at the same time.

Suppose that after the first beam-splitter we slow down the photon if it is reflected, but don't do anything if it passes through. This slowing down can be done by inserting a standard piece of optical equipment called a half-wave plate (itself just a piece of crystal with certain desired properties) in between the first and second beam-splitters. Interestingly, just by slowing down the reflected component after the first beam-splitter, we can alter what happens at the second beam-splitter! If previously, without the half-wave plate, the photon regularly used to come out of the second beam-splitter always reflected, then now, with the half-wave plate inserted, we can make it always pass through. This is the crux of the difference between a quantum object, such as a photon, and something classical, such as a coin. If the photon was random in the same way as a coin, this would be impossible. There is nothing we could do after the first coin toss to make the second coin toss absolutely certain. Coin tosses are completely independent, they happen definitively and in order, and nothing that we do once the first coin toss has happened can possibly change its result. However, with the photon, the first action is indefinite and hence both outcomes are still possible and equally real.

Ultimately this experiment can only be explained if we consider that the photon does not fully reflect or pass through, but actually does both at the same time. This is simply the only explanation that allows for the result that we observe. But what exactly is the mechanism that exploits this indeterminism at the first beam-splitter to give a definitive outcome after the second beam-splitter? This mechanism is known as interference, where one outcome is amplified and the others are cancelled.

‘But water waves can also interfere. Is this quantum interference too?' one of the theatre crew exclaimed. The answer is no. With classical waves, such as water waves, it is always one wave interfering with another, altogether different, wave; in the photon example, however, it is a single photon interfering with itself. This is an altogether different proposition and has no analogue in classical physics.

Note again that we are not describing just one freak experiment with photons: there have been thousands of other experiments confirming this and with different kinds of objects (e.g. electrons, nuclei, atoms, molecules) that confirm that any object can potentially exist in several different places at the same time. In fact these experiments are standard fare for undergraduate quantum courses all over the world. Further to this, we think that the evidence is conclusive enough to suggest that any object in this Universe can be in many different locations at the same time.

At this point, the theatre crew seemed to have had enough, ‘Hold on, Vlatko, this is all well and good, but how come we never see the same person in two places at the same time?' Of course they were correct in asking this; everything is composed of atoms and molecules so surely we should see everything in many places at the same time?

The answer why we don't see this phenomenon lies in another aspect of quantum theory, namely that of measurement. Measurements affect and change the state of the system being measured and through measurements we force the system to adopt one of its many possible states that existed prior to measurement. For example, even if the hero of the play was able to exist in several countries at the same time, as soon as someone asks him ‘which country are you in?', the hero would have to give a single definitive answer. Similarly, while I could exist in several places at the same time, as I am here talking to the actors, the fact that they were listening was a kind of measurement they were performing on me – an interaction that meant that I could not be in any other place at the time.

So our hero leading an instantaneous parallel life in a different country with a different family as a storyline is all well and good, but this is not what quantum theory tells us. Quantum theory tells us that as soon as our hero was to interact with anybody or anything, he would be forced to adopt a unique position. All objects in the Universe are capable of being in all possible states, unless they are forced by measurement to reduce to a subset of those states.

So how can it be that a photon interacting with a beam-splitter or the half-wave plate does not constitute a measurement? This brings us to the heart of the measurement problem in quantum mechanics. Some kinds of interaction seem to destroy the quantumness and give us a definitive answer, whilst others preserve the ability of physical objects to be in many different places at the same time. The rule is that if we need to know the exact value of some property of an object (e.g. spatial location, momentum, energy), then we have to destroy the quantumness to obtain it – otherwise we can leave the quantumness intact.

What is more common than us forcing the quantum object to lose its quantumness, is that it can also lose its quantumness naturally through its interaction with the environment. In fact every object is constantly fighting a battle with the environment. The environment always wants to know more about the quantum object and this is much like a measurement. This is one of the challenges physicists spend a lot of time thinking about and working on. Currently we cannot prevent an atom from strongly interacting with the environment for more than a few seconds (this is currently the most optimistic estimate and only applies to some properties of an atom). The point is that even within this time-frame, we are able to use the quantum indeterminism to do some pretty funky stuff, such as quantum computation and quantum cryptography.

This quantum indeterminism, being in many different states at the same time, is not just confined to the microscopic domain. It is also responsible for all kinds of amazing macroscopic effects that we see around us. It can be used to understand how electrical current can flow without any resistance whatsoever in a superconductor, how neutron stars manage to overcome gravity, how big spiders manage to climb vertical walls, and why you don't fall through your floor given that there is so much empty space between the atoms in your floor. The answers to all of these puzzling questions lie in an understanding of quantum theory.

As I continued my discussion with the theatre crew, I said: ‘This indeterminism stuff is not so hard to grasp, yet it's so important. I don't understand why kids are not taught this in school'. In fact, here in the UK, even if you do physics at high school, quantum mechanics is not taught in any meaningful way. I personally think this is a shame, as the earlier you are exposed to this kind of thinking, the easier it becomes later on in life to accept that this is actually how reality is. Grown-ups are just too sceptical and inflexible and sometimes we find our limited imagination working against us. Since our discussions, I believe Jon is in agreement as he has taken the affirmative action to design another play to communicate quantum theory to junior high school kids. I look forward to these kids eventually turning up in research journals, telling us old timers how we have just missed the point, and that quantum theory is even far more powerful than we thought possible.

At this stage I felt that I was doing all the talking and that they were doing all the listening, so I asked them what their play was about. The beginning of the story introduces one of the main characters telling a story about a spy in the USA. Upon hearing the word ‘spy', I interjected, and thought why not tell them about one of the most striking applications of quantum theory, that of cryptography. They might just be able to weave it into their play.

The science of cryptography, which studies how to make communications more secure and how to break communications, i.e. the art of code-making and code-breaking, has developed markedly with the use of quantum theoretic principles. It is one of the simplest and most effective applications of quantum theory to date.

The need to communicate secretly goes back to the dawn of civilization. The Spartans, who were regarded as the best Ancient Greek warriors, developed a very elaborate cryptographic method, using the scytale, some 400 years before the birth of Christ.

When the whole outcome of the battle could depend on some crucial information communicated between Spartan commanders it was important that the enemy could not get hold of it and use it to their advantage. The scytale was a long stick (the word itself means a baton) around which a strip of cloth was wrapped, following which a message was written on the cloth. The point was that when the cloth was unravelled, the letters of the message appeared to be completely scrambled. One needed the stick itself (or a stick of similar circumference), to decipher the original message; otherwise you could not be sure how the letters line up and what the original message was.

The Spartan method of encryption of messages is generally known as permutation. Permutation is a formal mathematical name for an orderly scrambling of the letters in a sentence to make it incomprehensible. Any type of scrambling will do, as long as it is structured and the receiving party knows how to unscramble it.

Another method of secret communication known to the Ancients is that of substitution. It was first used by Caesar, some 50 years before the birth of Christ. How did Caesar communicate secretly with his army leaders? The idea was very simple. He would write down the alphabet: ABCDEFGHIJK . . ., and then use the shifted sequence: DEFGHIJKLMN . . . instead. So whenever A appears in his sentence, he would replace it by D. Every B would be substituted by E, and so on. The last three letters of the alphabet would then be represented by ABC. The order ‘ATTACK TOMORROW' would then be encoded as ‘DWWDFN WRPRUURZ'. And it is clear that just looking at the raw encrypted message doesn't make a lot of sense to anyone.

So in each case unless we knew exactly how the alphabet was shifted or knew the circumference of the stick used to encode the message we wouldn't be able to decode the communication. Since ancient times substitution and permutation ciphers have evolved considerably from parchments and cloth and there are now some very complex computational encryption models based on these tricks which are practically unbreakable (that is, unless you have 1000-odd parallel computers or about 150 years handy). What is surprising is that though substitution and permutation are still two of the most popular tricks to encode secretly, they are inherently breakable. It is comforting to know that to break current models would take around 1000 parallel computers or 150 years of processing time. However, given that computational power is growing all the time, how long can these approaches really remain secure?

In fact, of the tens of thousands of cryptographic protocols known to us, the only unbreakable one, as proven by Shannon, is the ‘one-time pad'. The one-time pad is a cryptographic algorithm that cannot be broken simply through extending our computational power ad infinitum. It has a much stronger basis and, if done correctly, no amount of computing power currently or in the future is going to help. In theory it is very simple and only requires four rules to be obeyed to obtain perfect security:

1The two parties that wish to communicate securely must already share a secret key. This key is used to convert your message into an ‘encoded' form and then de-convert it back to the original form. It can only be known to both parties in communication (but cannot be known to anyone else). Once the secret key is established then the two parties can choose to communicate securely using that key at any time in the future.

2The key you use to encode your message must be completely random. If there is a way of predicting if the next digit is zero or one, the code can no longer be used as this leaves the protocol open to a structured attack.

3The key must be as long as the message itself, i.e. the number of bits that make up the key is the same as the number of bits that make up the message. If it is shorter then the protocol will be left susceptible to attack.

4The key must be used only once (again, repetitions leave the code open to attack).

This is all very well, and if we could do all of these we would have perfectly secure communication and many of the cryptographers around the world would be out of a job. But in reality the art and development of cryptography is alive and well because the one-time pad is so darned difficult to use. Running through the requirements, requirement 3 and 4 seem simple enough, requirement 2 raises some eyebrows – I mean what is a completely random key?, and requirement 1 just seems plain ridiculous. What's the point of two parties already needing to share a secret key in order to communicate a secret message? Surely whatever method was used to securely share the secret key can also be used to share the secret message. This just turns out to be a bit of a ‘Catch 22' – you need the secret key to communicate secretly, but you also need to communicate secretly to establish the secret key in the first place! The problem of perfectly secure communication (assuming we can satisfy requirement 2) then reduces to the problem of being able to share a secret key in the first place. This problem is known as the key distribution problem and is one of the main challenges in cryptography, to which standard computer science and engineering have no final answer.

This is where quantum theory comes in – not only does it help us with requirement 1, and hence the key distribution problem, it also helps us with requirement 2 – that the key should be completely randomly generated. The latter we will elaborate on in Chapter 10.

Quantum theory gives us a novel solution to the key distribution problem. By making use of the fact that any measurement to determine a state irrevocably changes the state we can tell when the state has been tampered with. This is what we discussed earlier, where each bit of a key could exist in several different states at any one time. Then, if an eavesdropper covertly tries to capture any information from the key, this interference acts like a measurement and hence forces the bit to adopt one state or the other. The sender and receiver can then analyse a subset of the key in order to determine whether there is any eavesdropping present. If not, then they use the key; otherwise they discard everything and start the process again. Of course, the eavesdropping detected may not have been due to the presence of a human agent, but may have been due to some kind of noise on the line. However, to be safe, we must assume the worst case.

This approach was discovered in the early 1980s by an American, Charles Bennett, and a Canadian, Giles Brassard, and has been implemented successfully on a wide variety of fronts. An alter native method proposed independently by Artur Ekert, an Oxford physicist, is also very popular. Currently the bit rate is not very high, but if you want to send a single message super-securely, then this could work for you. For example, in October 2007, a quantum cryptography system was tested by Nicolas Gisin during the Swiss National Elections in Geneva. The Geneva canton (jurisdiction) used a dedicated line for counting the ballots and communicating this information securely between the counting office and the central polling station. The message was short, so it required very few bits, but it was of the utmost importance, and the Swiss did not want to risk any tampering. This was a genuine application of quantum theory to facilitate a problem for which we have no solution classically.

This is all well and good, but now where does this leave us? The key question is whether and how, with the introduction of quantum theory, the concept of information is affected. Now, instead of having a definite outcome as we saw in the earlier chapters, quantum mechanics tells us that we can have several possible outcomes. In the previous chapter, when we talked about social ordering, information was seen as a binding force between different social units. Similarly, information here is also a binding force between different aspects of a quantum system.

One would think we were fairly safe in assuming that mutual information cannot ever exceed 100% (i.e. it cannot be better than perfect). If all children who go to good schools perform magnificently in life, we would say that there is 100% mutual information between good schools and successful life (whatever your definition of a successful life might be). You surely cannot share more than 100% of information. However, odd as it may sound, quantum systems can actually share more mutual information than 100%. Any theory of information needs to be able to handle this in order to fully describe reality; otherwise there will be parts of reality inaccessible to our understanding.

To explain how information can exceed 100%, imagine a simple two-state quantum system, such as the ‘spin' of an electron. Using the metaphor of spinning tops, we can consider that electrons are like small spinning tops, each ‘spinning' in its own way, depending on the external circumstances. An electron, just like the spinning top, can be considered to spin clockwise or counterclockwise in any given direction: horizontally, vertically, at 45 degrees, and so on. Astonishingly, if we measure the electron spin at two different times, then the mutual information between these measurements can actually exceed any value that we could had previously thought possible. In classical physics, spins at different times can be correlated in the horizontal or vertical direction, so that, if the first measurement of spin yields ‘horizontal clockwise', so does the second measurement, in which case, the mutual information between them is 100%. Real electrons, on the other hand, behave quantum mechanically and their spin measurements could be correlated in the vertical direction at the same time as the horizontal direction (and all other directions!). This is because electrons can spin simultaneously in the clockwise and counterclockwise directions, something that no spinning top can do. In this case we can say that they may share up to 200% information. This super-correlation is known as quantum entanglement, or ‘spooky action at a distance' as Einstein referred to it.

There is a particularly fruitful way of viewing mutual information between objects that is responsible for the common sense phrase ‘The whole is at least as large as any of its parts'. Suppose you have two friends, Steve and Bryan, and each of them has a choice of what to do next. Steve could either continue with his current employment or quit and find another job. Bryan faces the same choices. If they are completely uncertain about their future, we would attribute one bit of information to each of them, since they each have a choice of two possibilities. Now it is clear that the information residing in the joint future of Steve and Bryan is at least as big as each of the individual pieces of information. This is easy to see by imagining that we found out that Steve left his job. So there is no more uncertainty about his future. However, we still don't know what Bryan will do. The uncertainty is now as large as one bit, and it all lies in Bryan's choice. This is precisely the same as the ‘I'll have a drink, if you have a drink' example we gave earlier. It is interesting that though the causal link in the two scenarios is different, it still leads to the same mutual information. Moreover, mutual information does not depend on causality at all; it is quite reasonable that two parties that have no causal link whatsoever can still share 100% correlation.

We can now phrase this all in terms of entropy, the measure we saw earlier to reflect the degree of uncertainty in a system. The entropy of the whole system must (classically speaking) be at least as large as the entropy of any of its parts. In this sense it is useful to think of entropy in terms of an area. The area of the USA is at least as big as any of its states. Even if some states overlap and contain common regions this surely must always be the case. So if you are looking for someone in the USA, your uncertainty concerning their whereabouts must be at least as big as your uncertainty if you know they are somewhere in California. The uncertainty of their position in California cannot be larger than the uncertainty of their position in the whole of the USA, given that there are many additional places in the rest of the USA to hide.

Astonishingly, in quantum mechanics this sentence no longer holds. In the quantum version of this task it may be more difficult to find the person if you focus specifically on California than if you search the whole of the USA. Somehow, in the quantum version, the area of California turns out to be larger than the overall area of the USA!

So what is our evidence that quantum systems behave in such a manner? Well, now I guess you are asking if this is for real. It seems very counterintuitive. This is true and moreover we can do an experiment with, say, two spinning electrons, to test it. They are created in such a way that there is absolutely no uncertainty about their overall state, but, if we look at each of them individually, it looks like a complete mess. In other words, they need each other to fully describe their state. This does not happen classically; if one of the systems is in a mess then adding another system cannot decrease the amount of mess. Ultimately this goes back to the fact that the two electrons are really super-correlated in quantum physics, some might say like ‘identical twins' – i.e. there is some additional mutual information ‘beyond the norm'.

So if this is how reality really works, can we still describe it in terms of information? The answer is affirmative, but clearly the Shannon entropy is not enough. The problem with Shannon's information is that it always tells us that there is at least as much information in a whole as there is in any of its parts. But, as we discussed, this is not true for quantum systems. Information therefore requires a more generalized treatment than that proposed by Shannon.

The key change is to upgrade the (classical) notion of a bit to something called a quantum bit or ‘qubit'. A qubit is a quantum system that, unlike a bit, can exist in any combination of the two states, zero and one. All other ingredients of Shannon's theory remain intact. To quantify information, instead of using the entropy of a bit, we take the entropy of a qubit. This was first done by another student of John Wheeler, Ben Schumacher, who also coined the term qubit. The change from bit to qubit, although it may appear trivial, actually has profound implications. Going back to the example of the whole being less than some of its parts, the quantum entropy of two correlated quantum systems can now indeed be smaller than the entropy of each of them individually.

The theory of quantum information is a superset of Shannon information in that it reduces to Shannon information in certain cases. The key thing that quantum information tells us about reality, beyond what we have already learnt through Shannon, is that there is a great deal of untapped potential in terms of what we can achieve in information processing. Quantum information theory is already being exploited to design a new order of super-fast computers, highly secure cryptographic systems and, believe it or not, to teleport objects across vast distances.

The reader may be worried that the upgrade to quantum information now suddenly invalidates all the conclusions from Part One of the book. Quite the opposite in fact is the case. We could have approached DNA from the perspective of quantum information but, as it is a macroscopic phenomenon, the results of using the classical theory of information appear to capture fully the most important function of DNA. The same can be said for any of the information processing systems in the first part of the book. All such systems could be re-derived from the perspective of quantum information theory, but as they are macroscopic systems, the approximation given by classical information theory is sufficient. This is not to say that quantum physics does not apply to macroscopic objects – on the contrary, it applies to all matter in the Universe. It's just that its predictions are much less distinct from conventional physics at this level – so naturally we tend not to bother with the additional complexity of using quantum physics when we feel we don't need to.

From the point of view of information we can summarize two of the most important features of quantum theory; first, that qubits can exist in a variety of different states at the same time; and, secondly, when we measure a qubit we reduce it to a classical result, i.e. we get a definitive outcome.

Both of the above features could be either positive or negative characteristics, depending on the application. Regarding the notion that qubits can exist in a variety of different states at the same time, a positive is that the qubit has a far more intricate structure than a classical bit. This gives more power and flexibility to quantum information processing than was possible with our classical theory of information. Conversely, in some cases, as in cryptography, if the receiver doesn't have precise details then he is unable to decipher the message without damaging the state. Likewise with the measurement. On the positive side, we have explained that in quantum cryptography, it allows us to detect eavesdroppers; however, on the negative side, it reduces a qubit to a bit, and therefore reduces our information processing ability.

The pros and cons of quantum information are best seen in the next chapter as we discuss quantum computing.

Key points

Quantum physics started a hundred years ago, describing how small objects behave.

Two mind-boggling features of quantum physics mark it apart from anything we have seen so far. One is the possibility of objects being in two or more different states at the same time. An atom can be here and there at the same time, for example. The other one is the intrinsic randomness in the behaviour of quantum systems. We simply cannot in most cases tell what a quantum system will do even when we know everything there is to know about it.

Understanding that quantum physics is all about information helps us to develop real world applications to achieve a new order of communications.

Quantum cryptography is one of the areas where quantum physics has demonstrated a new order of information processing, where we can now communicate more securely than we ever thought possible.

Quantum cryptography is not just a theoretical construct; it has been successfully implemented over vast distances.