Vlatko Vedral.(2018).2024111Decoding-Reality.Oxford University Press => 0101




0901Surfing the Waves: Hyper-Fast Computers

Who hasn't heard of a computer? In a society entirely dominated by these transistor infested boxes there are probably only a few remaining isolated tribes in the Amazon or around the Kalahari that have not been affected. From organizing our finances, flying a plane, warming up food, controlling our heartbeat (for some), these devices are prevalent in each and every aspect of our society. Whether we are talking about personal computers, mainframe computers, or the embedded computers that we find in our mobile phones or microwave ovens, it is very hard to even imagine a world without them.

The term computer, however, means more than just your average Apple Mac or PC. A computer, at its most basic level, is any object that can take instructions, and perform computations based on those instructions. In this sense computation is not limited to a machine or mechanical apparatus; atomic physical phenomena or living organisms are also perfectly valid forms of computers (and in many cases far more powerful than what we can achieve through current models). We'll discuss alternative models of computation later in this chapter.

Computers come in a variety of shapes and sizes and some are not always identifiable as computers at all (would you consider your fridge a computer?). Some are capable of doing millions of calculations in a single second, while others may take long periods of time to do even the most simple calculations. But theoretically, anything one computer is capable of doing, another computer is also capable of doing. Given the right instructions, and sufficient memory, the computer found in your fridge could, for example, simulate Microsoft Windows. The fact that it might be ridiculous to waste time using the embedded computer in your fridge to do anything other than what it was designed for is irrelevant – the point is that it obeys the same model of computation as every other computer and can therefore – by hook or by crook – eventually achieve the same result.

This notion is based on what is now called the Church–Turing thesis (dating back to 1936), a hypothesis about the nature of mechanical calculation devices, such as electronic computers. Alan Turing and Alonzo Church introduced the formalization of an algorithm and a ‘purely mechanical' model for computing, that all modern computers today obey. The thesis claims that any calculation that is at all possible to perform can in fact be performed by an algorithm running on their computational model (which assumes that sufficient time and storage space are available). This leads us to the notion of a universal computer, on which all modern computers are based.

The drive for miniaturization of computing technology cannot have gone unnoticed. In particular, computers have been getting smaller (and hence faster, as closer circuitry means less distance to travel) ever since the first computer was built by von Neumann in the 1940s. In the late 1950s the then chairman and co-founder of Intel, Gordon Moore, noticed a very interesting and remarkable trend: every two years or so computers tend to double in their speed and memory. Moore noted this trend in one of his reports and this has since become known as Moore's law.

But why has Moore's law been upheld in the last 50 years? It certainly is not a natural law as it depends on the existence of humans and is largely related to factors within our control. Perhaps instead it should therefore be known as ‘Moore's trend' or ‘Moore's observation'. Some people more cynical of the computing industry may even say that Moore's law has been correct because of Moore (CEO of Intel, remember). By noting the law, he effectively set the standard for other companies. Given that Intel have such a dominant position within the microchip industry, Moore's law is thus a bit of a self-fulfilling prophecy.

If technology continues to abide by Moore's law, then the continually shrinking size of circuitry packed onto silicon chips would eventually reach a point where individual elements would be no larger than a few atoms. Then what? Where do we go from there? How small and fast can computers be?

Surely, however, there is a natural limitation to this exponential growth. At the moment we are using about 100 electrons to encode one bit of information. But in about 10 years time, we may be using one electron to encode one bit of information. Can we go beyond this and what is the ultimate limit? If physics tells us anything, it's that we should never be too dogmatic about our conclusions. History is littered with ‘no-go' statements which are later proven to ‘go' (e.g. remember Lord Kelvin's statement that machines heavier than air cannot fly, said only 30 years before the Wright brothers proved him wrong). So even as we find the ultimate limit to computation, there is already inherent uncertainty as to how long this limit will hold.

To understand the ultimate limits we first need to understand what computers are all about. Well, it is simple: computers are all about processing bits. The computers we have at present use the laws of Boolean logic to shift, change, and reshuffle bits (i.e. zeros and ones). George Boole published his Boolean algebra in 1854 with a complete system that allowed computational processes to be mathematically modelled. Remember that Shannon used this in the construction of his communication process. The implementation of Boolean logic currently is in terms of transistors, however there are a variety of plausible alternatives. As we know, classical bits, by definition, exist in one of two different states at any given time – a zero or a one. With quantum mechanics, however, we are permitted to have a zero and a one at the same time present in one physical system. In fact, we are permitted to have an infinite range of states between zero and one – which we called a qubit. The number of states a qubit could occupy is infinite because in principle we can tweak the ratio of probabilities in which the states 0 and 1 occur to any desired accuracy. When with certainty we have either 0 or 1 then this reduces to the classical case.

Also, in line with Moore's trend, at the atomic scale the physical laws that govern the behaviour and properties of the transistor circuitry (which is based on semiconductor technology) are inherently quantum mechanical in nature, not classical. Thus the question of whether a new kind of computer could be devised based on the principles of quantum physics is therefore not a forced endeavour but a necessary and natural next step.

It is also interesting to note how transistors, which are the ‘neurons' of all computers, work by exploiting properties of semiconductors. The explanation of how semiconductors function is entirely quantum mechanical in nature; it simply cannot be understood classically. Are we thus to conclude that classical physics cannot explain how classical computers work? Or are we to say that classical computers are, in fact, quantum computers?

The fact is that classical information processing can be a good approximation to reality at the macroscopic scale, and that sometimes the high level of detail that it offers is sufficient for everyday purposes. In fact it's not unlikely; had we not have been near the quantum limit now, where we are forced to start looking at computing with individual atoms, perhaps there would not have been even the same degree of motivation behind researching into quantum computers and the underlying quantum information theory.

Quantum computation, as it is, is an extremely exciting and rapidly growing field of investigation. An increasing number of researchers, with a whole spectrum of different backgrounds, ranging from physics, via computing sciences and information theory to mathematics and philosophy, are involved in researching properties of quantum-based computation.

That the laws of classical physics lead us to completely different constraints on information processing than computation based on quantum mechanics, was first realized by an American physicist, Richard Feynman. Later and somewhat independently, this idea was extended significantly by his British colleague, David Deutsch. Both being students of the remarkable John Wheeler, whom we met in Chapter 1, it is perhaps not surprising that they were driven by the same question of the fundamental link between physics and computation.

Two of the most successful applications of quantum computing are in the factorization of large numbers and searching a large database. The first problem is important, as much of modern day cryptography is based on the difficulty of factoring large prime numbers (we will discuss this later), and the second problem is important because any problem in Nature can be reduced to a search for the correct answer amongst several (or a few million) incorrect answers. Searches are so ubiquitous that they range from you searching for a file on your computer to a plant searching for a molecule in order to convert the Sun's energy to useful work (we'll discuss this later, too).

So why does quantum mechanics help here? Why can't we do these with our normal everyday computers? Well the point is that, yes we can, and we do use our computers for these purposes, but as the size of the prime factor or list to be searched grows, it takes longer and longer to get an answer. Quantum physics helps with these kinds of problems, because unlike a conventional computer which checks each possibility one at a time, quantum physics allows us to check multiple possibilities simultaneously.

Enter another couple of illustrious employees of Bell Laboratories, Peter Shor and Lov Grover (to add to Claude Shannon, whom we met earlier). Whilst Shannon was looking at the optimization of messages sent over a telephone wire, Shor, in 1992, was looking in more detail at the security of these messages.

Security is important in many aspects of life. Just as you want your credit card details to be secure when you are paying for something, governments and various companies want their documents to be securely stored and unavailable to the public or other governments or companies. As we discussed in Chapter 8, secrecy in the modern world is based on the notion that something is ‘computationally secure', i.e. it is secure in the sense that to break the code would require an inordinate amount of computing time and power. For, example, it is very easy for computers to multiply two numbers. You can check it yourself. Take two one-hundred digit long numbers (they are huge, like for example the number 100000000000000 000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000 0000000000000000000000000000000000000000) and ask a computer to multiply them together. This, the computer will be able to execute in a split second, and you'll hardly notice that it's taken any time at all.

On the other hand, finding factors of a large number is very difficult. This is because there are simply many possibilities to explore. Imagine the 100. What are its factors? Two times 50 is equal to 100. But so is 4 times 25. Or 5 times 20, or 10 times 10. The number of factors grows quickly and finding all of them presents a great difficulty for any current (classical) computer (it's exponentially slower than multiplying numbers in the first place).

How is it that a quantum computer can factorize efficiently? The explanation, first presented by Shor and now known as Shor's algorithm, is that a quantum computer, by exploiting the quantum principle of superpositions, can exist in many different states at the same time. Imagine a single computer in a superposition of being in many different spatial locations at the same time. In each of those locations you can configure the machine to divide your number by a different number to search for factors. And this is a massive, stupendous speed-up, since one quantum computer is now simultaneously performing all these divisions, one in each different spatial location. And, if one of them is successful – we have our factors!

Have you ever wondered why your PIN (personal identification number) is secure when you withdraw money from an ATM machine (automatic teller)? How come that neither the bank staff nor the bank managed know your PIN? Why do they not obtain it when you type it into the ATM and steal your money?

The reason is that the ATM machine performs the following operation. When you type in your PIN with the intention of withdrawing the money, this (usually a four to six digit number) gets multiplied by a huge (say a 500 digit) number. The resulting number (a number 504 digits long) is than checked by the bank. And if it is in the database, you will be allowed to proceed with your transaction.

But, and this is the crucial but, the bank cannot figure out your PIN from the 504-digit long number that they have in their database. It would simply take them a very long time – longer than the age of the Universe with current computers!

The punch-line of all this is that, using a quantum computer, we can factorize numbers very quickly. If we have a quantum computer with 10,000 quantum bits, we could factor a 500-digit number in a few seconds. And that would be the end of most current security!

Lov Grover, on the other hand, in 1996, was interested in an altogether different problem. Grover wanted to know how to design an efficient search algorithm using the mass parallelism offered by a quantum computer. His idea can be explained through the following example: suppose that someone gives you access to a library containing a lot of unsorted books. If you want to find a particular book, then you simply have to search through all the books until you find the one you are looking for. If there are a million books to go through and, if it takes a second to check each book, that could take a long time indeed (one million seconds is equal to about two weeks)! A quantum computer could speed things up greatly and would only take a thousand seconds (instead of a million) – which is about a couple of hours – and this is what Grover managed to prove.

In a list with four entries (two bits of information labelled 00, 01, 10, 11) we would normally require a maximum of three searches to find the right one. This is because you would have to look at each of the elements and, if you are unlucky, the first three elements will not be the ones you are looking for. Quantum search can, on the other hand, search a four-element quantum database in only one step. As the size of the database increases so does the quantum advantage.

Searching a database of four elements and finding the one that we want is similar to tossing two coins and observing the result of both. The first coin toss would correspond to asking which half of the database the desired element is in (i.e. is it in the top half or the bottom half), and the second coin toss would then give you the exact desired element (i.e. of the two elements left, is it one element or the other). It is an inescapable conclusion that in classical physics (hence classical computing) you would need a minimum of two coin tosses or two steps to uniquely distinguish between four outcomes.

Using quantum computers, however, we can do this with half the effort, in only one step. This quantum computation is analogous to the example of a single photon going through two beam-splitters. There we also had four different possibilities (RR, PR, RP, PP), but we only needed a single photon to generate a definite single outcome. The quantum property of superposition allows one photon to explore four different possibilities at the same time, and ultimately, through interference of the different paths, will compress them into a definite single outcome (i.e. the element we are searching for). This logic can be generalized so that a quantum computer could be designed to scan any number of database elements much faster than a classical computer.

The fact that the search problem is one of the problems in which quantum computers offer a speed-up is particularly interesting given that nearly any problem can be phrased in terms of a search algorithm. For example, even if we consider factorization, this can be rephrased in terms of a search algorithm in the sense that we are searching through all possible factors that would give us the desired answer. In this case there may be more than one answer, but conceptually the problem is the same. Also, the factorization example is a good one, as in this case the search algorithm is proven to be not as efficient as Shor's algorithm. This is as expected. The search algorithm is a general algorithm and is applicable for any search problem, whereas Shor's factorization algorithm is specifically geared for the problem of factorization and does so using hidden properties related to the structure of the problem. Therefore, to put things into context, whilst quantum computation does offer a significantly more powerful computational model than classical computation, it is not implausible that there are classical problems that can still be more efficiently solved with a classical algorithm than with the general quantum search algorithm.

The main limitation of quantum computation geared towards solving classical problems is that we ultimately have to make a measurement in order to extract the answer, given that the question we are asking requires a definite answer. Whilst this measurement is necessary, it is an intrinsically probabilistic process and there is always a finite probability that our answer may be wrong. In some cases, such as Shor's algorithm, it is straightforward to classically verify whether the answer is correct, and if it's not we run the quantum computer again until we have success. In others we need to find more creative solutions. The reader need not get too distracted with this limitation as it's not a major obstacle to quantum computing in practice. A far more serious inefficiency is the effect of environmental noise which is, in practice, very difficult to control. Any quantum computation that wants to be more efficient than its classical counterpart has to be able to deal with both of these issues.

In addition to the factorizing and searching quantum algorithms there are a host of other more specialized problems that quantum computers could do significantly better than their classical counterparts. However, probably the most fascinating application of a quantum computer lies in simulating complex physical systems. Some systems are so complex, our atmosphere for example, that they are extremely difficult to simulate using present computers and take an enormous amount of time. In fact, even far simpler systems, such as simulating a physical system with 20 atoms, are already extremely difficult for a normal computer. At the same time these problems are very important to us and we would like answers within our lifetime. Of course, we simulate these problems today on normal computers, but we are unable to simulate them in their entirety and compromise by simulating only a few key features in order to get an answer within a reasonable period of time. We'd all like better predictions of climate, not just day by day, but also in the long run. Being able to predict the climate more accurately is not only important to make our lives more pleasant; it could be crucial for our survival on Earth. And for this, we definitely need better understanding of the evolution of various weather patterns.

Simulating other systems with quantum computers is a subject in its infancy. It lies in such uncharted territory that we don't even know any of its borders or limitations. I personally think that this area will explode in the future, but its real power is difficult to fully grasp at this stage.

Interestingly for engineers and computer scientists, all this quantum weirdness, far from being a hindrance, can be utilized for technological purposes to construct quantum computers that fundamentally use this weirdness to run much faster than any current computer can. Thinking of computation as a process that maximizes mutual information between the output and the input – i.e. the question being asked, we can think of the speed of computation as the rate of establishing mutual information, i.e. the rate of build up of correlations between the output and the input. Furthermore the fact that qubits offer a higher degree of mutual information than is possible with bits, directly translates into the quantum speed-up that we see in Shor's and Grover's algorithms.

The good news is that small-scale quantum computers have even already been experimentally realized. These quantum computers, although operating on a very limited basis, have still been successful in demonstrating a degree of speed-up beyond anything possible with classical computers.

In terms of the make up of quantum computers, qubits could be encoded in atoms, subatomic particles, many-atom clusters, in light, or indeed in some combination of these. However, none of these at present offer a medium to store, say, 1000 qubits in a superposition state, for long enough to assist with more complex calculations.

How far away are we from fully fledged quantum computers? By this, I mean how far are we from an implementation that can hold thousands or millions of qubits in a superposition? In short, the answer is quite far; the current record (depending on how you view it) is somewhere between 10 and 15 qubits. However, there are many ways of encoding information quantum mechanically simply because there are many different systems that could be used to encode quantum information, e.g. ions in an ion trap, photons in a cavity, free photons, nuclear spins in nuclear magnetic resonance, electron spins in electroparamagnetic resonance, and a whole host of solid state devices (such as superconductors). We are not short of candidates for implementation!

Experimental physicists these days have an almost perfect control of atoms. They can engineer all sort of things, such as isolating a single atom inside a very small trap (on the order of a million times smaller than a metre). How do they know that a single atom is sitting there? They know, because they can shine some laser light into this small area and if the laser light is reflected inside, this then allows them to see this atom.

So what can we perform with 10–15 qubits?. Not much that our existing computers cannot do. We can, and we have, multiplied two numbers, 3 and 5 to obtain 15. So that's a start! Anyone can of course do that, but the significance of these kinds of experiments is to show that this can be done at the quantum level, which is a whole new game. Conventional computers currently need some 10,000 atoms to achieve multiplication of 3 and 5. So, quantum computers are in this sense more efficient. What is a shame is that no current quantum technology knows how to compute with anything more than 15 qubits.

The question is: why is it difficult to scale up quantum computers? The answer to this question is the same as to the question we asked in Chapter 8, i.e. why don't we see quantum effects at the macroscopic level? The difficulty, simply stated, is that we need large systems to be in many different states at the same time in order that they demonstrate quantum behaviour. But, the larger the system, the more ways there are for the particular information about the state to leak out into the environment. And as soon as any information leaks out, superpositions, and with them quantum computers, are destroyed. The process of information leaking out can also be considered as the environment (i.e. what is outside of the system) performing a measurement to gather information about the state of the system. As we know from our discussion on cryptography this inevitably damages the quantum state in question. This process is known in technical parlance as decoherence. So basically, it is difficult to make large-scale quantum computers for the same reason that we don't see people in multiple places at the same time (unless after a few drinks).

An intriguing analogy here is with crime. Statistics indicate that most successful robbers are those who operate by themselves (women apparently do this more frequently than men and are therefore much more successful robbers). The point to this is that the more people you have in your gang, the bigger the chances that one of them will betray you for whatever reason. It makes intuitive sense somehow that the more people that possess the same information, the higher the probability that this information will get out. Well, you can think that it is exactly the same principle as with atoms – the more atoms there are in a superposition, the harder it is to stop one of them decohering to the environment.

This all sounds like bad news for quantum computers. Is it going to be impossible to make reliable large-scale quantum computers? The answer fortunately is ‘no'. Unlike the perfect crime, we can in fact have perfect quantum computers. How is this? The trick to achieve this is the same that makes DNA replication faithful, or at least faithful enough for life to propagate. The solution is redundancy!

If you want to have 100 useful quantum bits in your computer, then you have to build a 1000-qubit large quantum computer. This means that for every one qubit, you have an additional nine copies of that qubit, so, if the occasional one decoheres, you can still make a majority decision over the remaining nine. Quantum superpositions can thus be protected, and whilst there are more optimal ways of adding redundancy, this in essence is the key concept.

As I write these lines (summer 2008) we are already moving towards producing quantum computational microchips. Furthermore, this is happening right now and right here in Singapore (I say this as I am sitting down and sipping a double espresso in Spinelli's on the National University campus). On these microchips, experimental physicists are trying to integrate components involving super-cold atoms and coherent photons in small numbers. Micro-engineering has progressed so much in the last 20 years that it is amazing to see how much stuff can be packed onto a very small area of a two-dimensional chip. Making a fully quantum computational unit can easily take some 5–10 years to complete, but so much ingenuity has gone into the research here that the possibility of large quantum computers is a very real prospect!

As with living systems, the battle to build a quantum computer is ultimately a battle against entropy. The lower the overall entropy of an arbitrary physical system the higher the chances that its constituent atoms may be entangled. Typical atoms useful for quantum computation usually need to be at a temperature close to absolute zero (around 1 billionth of a kelvin). Furthermore, given that the temperature in the rest of the laboratory is 300 billion times higher than that, it's a constant battle. This is a kind of Maxwell's demon scenario, where a process needs to reduce the entropy of the system in order to get some useful information processing done.

A striking piece of evidence to show how quantum effects can be seen in some macroscopic objects was demonstrated by Syantani Ghosh and her colleagues in 2003. Ghosh showed that quantum superpositions between many atoms exist in a piece of salt involving billions of atoms and at temperatures of a few millikelvin. This was a huge shock because it showed that quantum phenomena, whose power was thought to be confined to the infinitesimal world of subatomic particles, can produce effects that remain measurable on macroscopic scales.

This discovery was so momentous, it was difficult for anyone to believe. In a paper I submitted in 2000 to Nature, the premier scientific journal, I made similar predictions and was duly laughed off the court. The fact that the prediction has now been borne out by Ghosh's experiment catapults the mystery of quantum information into the wider arena. Nature kindly sent me Ghosh's paper as they thought I would be pleased to know that one of my predictions turned out to be correct (it doesn't happen too often). Even better still, since Ghosh's results, a number of other results have demonstrated similar effects in other materials, some of them being at much higher temperatures than this (even, startlingly, at room temperature!).

We are now realizing that advanced quantum effects are much more ubiquitous in macroscopic systems and this gives us hope that one day we may find that Nature has already provided us with a quantum computer and all that is left for us to do is to program it. After all, Nature has already invented many tricks before us humans. Radar and error correction by redundancy are just two out of many such tricks used by living systems. Might it therefore be that somewhere there is a living system which harnesses the speed-up advantages of quantum computation? Even better, perhaps quantum computation is so ubiquitous that it takes place in every living cell.

There is continuing evidence that more and more natural processes must be based on quantum principles in order to function as they do. For example, we consider the process of photosynthesis, which is one of the key natural processes for maintaining life on Earth.

The reader will recall from Chapter 5 that all living beings are like thermodynamical engines similar to Maxwell's demons, whose crucial task is to battle the natural tendency to increase disorder. Life does that by absorbing highly disordered energy coming from the Sun and converting it to a more ordered and useful form. Photosynthesis is the name of the mechanism by which plants absorb, store, and use this light energy from the Sun. This energy is converted to an ordered form and used for the functioning of the cells. Recent fascinating experiments by Graham Fleming and his group at the University of Berkeley, California, suggest that quantum effects do matter in photosynthesis. Furthermore, they point out a close connection between the photosynthetic energy transfer and Grover's optimal quantum search algorithm. In other words, plants are so much more efficient than what we expected that maybe there is some underlying quantum information processing contributing. Biological plant efficiency is super-high, around 98% of radiation that hits the leaf does get stored efficiently. The best man-made photocells, on the other hand, can barely achieve a 20% efficiency. So there is an enormous difference; how do plants do it?

The complete answer is not entirely clear but the overall picture is this. When sunlight hits a surface that is not designed to carefully absorb and store it, the energy is usually dissipated to heat within the surface, or reflected. Either way, it is lost as far as any subsequent useful work is concerned. The dissipation within the surface happens because each atom in the surface acts independently of other atoms. When radiation is absorbed in this incoherent way, then all its useful properties vanish. What is needed is for the atoms and molecules in the surface to act in unison. And this is a feat that all green plants manage to achieve.

In order to understand how this happens, it is helpful to think of each molecule in a plant as a database element in Grover's search algorithm. All molecules vibrate as they interact with one another. When they are hit by light, they change their vibration and dynamics and what ensues implements Grover's dynamics with the energy ending up in the most stable configuration at the end (and this configuration is the database element that Grover's algorithm is meant to identify).

Admittedly, Fleming's experiments have been performed at low temperature (77 kelvin, while plants normally operate at 300 kelvin). Therefore, it is not entirely clear if any quantum effects can survive at the higher temperature. However, even the fact that there exists a real possibility that quantum computation has been implemented by living systems is a very exciting and growing area of research.

But things could be even grander. The most fascinating suggestion of all is that quantum theory may be necessary in the very basis of life itself. You will remember that in Chapter 4 I said that the information to replicate life is encoded into four different elements, which are just molecules labelled by A, C, T, and G. If we think of this as a very simple database, with four records, the task of a DNA replicator computer is to scan an arbitrary DNA strand and match the correct record from the database to each of the molecules. The database logic is that A is always paired with T, and C is always paired with G. This simulates the replication process in our cells, as each molecule on one DNA strand finds its companion on the new strand. In this way we can consider DNA replication analogous to a four-element database search problem.

An Indian physicist called Arvind asked the question in the late 1990s as to why Nature uses two bits (four molecules) to encode life. Wouldn't it be simpler just to use one bit (i.e. just two molecules)? This, as you may recall, was one of our big questions in Chapter 4. It seems odd to use two bits given that we know that everything can be done in terms of single bits and it seems intuitively simpler to use single bits, so why has Nature made the extra effort? Shouldn't Nature, starting from nothing, find it easier to stumble upon a singl-bit encoding, than a two-bit encoding? Arvind's answer is simple: It may be easier to come up with single bits, but there is a bigger quantum advantage in search when we have two quantum bits. With two quantum bits Grover's quantum search algorithm finds the solution in just one step. Therefore, if we optimize for the speed of replication, then two quantum bits allow for more efficient information processing than one classical bit in the same number of steps. So maybe this is what Nature was thinking.

Arvind's suggestion is very smart, but there is a crucial issue here: can DNA actually be a quantum computer? DNA is a macromolecule so it's not clear how this could be the case and how molecules could exist in many different states at the same time. Whether DNA is based on classical or quantum computing is, remarkably, not actually known. I say ‘remarkably' because DNA has been studied extensively for the last 60 years. We therefore have to be patient and leave this question open for the time being.

The picture that seems to be emerging is that larger and larger systems may be capable of exhibiting quantum effects under certain conditions. We are not sure, for example, if and how we can generalize this. Perhaps everything would exhibit quantum effects if we know how to look at them in the right way. So is it the case that any complex piece of matter or energy can potentially, under the right external conditions, be used as a quantum computer? If we take a step further and couple this to the Church–Turing thesis of the universal computing machine, what this could imply is that any piece of the Universe can simulate, in a more or less efficient manner, any other piece of the Universe. Perhaps even reality itself can be seen as the product of a complex multilayered quantum computation. This is, of course, a huge leap of faith but it will be the essence of our discussion in Chapter 12.

Key points

Quantum computers force a higher order of information processing than we can currently achieve. They are the smallest and fastest gadgets that the laws of physics currently allow us to construct.

They can solve some important problems for us that conventional computers cannot. Two instances are the factorization problem and the search problem. The former is used in various security protocols, the latter in many optimization techniques.

Quantum computers are not a distant dream. They are being built at present in many laboratories in the world.

Quantum effects are experimentally being seen in macroscopic objects such as pieces of solids and organic molecules in living systems.