Vlatko Vedral.(2018).2024111Decoding-Reality.Oxford University Press => 1201Destruction ab Toto: Nothing from Something

1201Destruction ab Toto: Nothing from Something

The main view promoted by this book is that underlying many different aspects of reality is some form of information processing. The theory of information started rather innocently, as the result of a very specific question that Shannon considered, which was how to maximize the capacity of communication between two users. Shannon showed that all we need is to associate a probability to an event, and defined a metric that allowed you to quantify the information content of that event. Interestingly, because of its simplicity and intuitiveness, Shannon's views have been successfully applied to many other problems. We can view biological information through Shannon's theory as a communication in time (where the objective of natural selection is to propagate the gene pool into the future). But it is not only that communications and biology are trying to optimize information. In physics, systems arrange themselves so that entropy is maximized, and this entropy is quantified in the same way as Shannon's information. We encounter the same form of information in other phenomena. Financial speculation is also governed by the same concept of entropy, and optimizing your profit is the same problem as optimizing your channel capacity. In social theory, society is governed by its interconnectedness or correlation and this correlation itself is quantified by Shannon's entropy.

Underlying all these phenomena was the classical Boolean logic where events had clear outcomes, either yes or no, on or off, and so on. In our most accurate description of reality, given by quantum theory, we know that bits of information are an approximation to a much more precise concept of qubits. Qubits, unlike bits, can exist in a multitude of states, any combination of yes and no, on and off.

Shannon's information theory has been extended to account for quantum theory and the resulting framework, quantum information theory, has already shown a number of advantages. The greater power of quantum information theory is manifested in more secure cryptographic protocols, a completely new order of computing, quantum teleportation, and a number of other applications that were simply not possible according to Shannon's view. However, as quantum information theory is ultimately an extension of Shannon's information theory, under the right conditions the quantum information theory reduces to Shannon's. We also saw some tantalizing indications that biological systems may utilize quantum information to make some processes, such as photosynthesis, more efficient than anything possible according to our classical understanding of information.

The main aim of this book is how to understand reality in terms of information. In this respect it is appropriate to view the whole Universe as a quantum computer, given that this is our most accurate description. Then we estimated the total power of the Universe, a memory of 10 to the power of 100 bits and approximately 10 to the power of 90 bits processed per second. This estimate was possible by dividing the Universe into smaller and smaller units and then making use of the fact that the information content of each of these units is then proportional to its surface area.

So where does the information actually come from? When two people communicate one of them generates the information for the other. Any information in economic or social contexts comes likewise from human interactions. The information in human interaction, i.e. biological systems, comes from the molecular properties of DNA. The behaviour of molecules is ultimately governed by the laws of quantum physics. In this way we can reduce any information that comprises reality down to quantum information. However, we are then still left with the question of where the quantum information comes from.

We now come back to the idea that the whole Universe is digital and we need to decode it in order that we can compress all the information into our laws; laws from which our reality then emerges. The fact that reality is somehow encoded into these laws is by no means novel. The Ancient Greeks, as we saw with Archimedes, understood the Universe that way, as did one of the first ‘proper' scientists, Galileo Galilei.

Here is a quote from Galileo clearly expressing the view that the truths in the Universe are encoded into mathematics: ‘Philosophy is written in this grand book – I mean the Universe – which stands continually open to our gaze, but it cannot be understood unless one first learns to comprehend the language in which it is written. It is written in the language of mathematics, and its characters are triangles, circles, and other geometric figures, without which it is humanly impossible to understand a single word of it; without these, one is wandering about in a dark labyrinth.'

But we want to go beyond Galileo's sentiment in two key respects. First, we want to use information instead of geometric characters. Second, we want to explain how the information in the Universe arises. Once the information is decoded and compressed into appropriately defined laws, we can then understand our reality according to the information encoded in these laws. The laws themselves must be an integral part of this evolving picture. Otherwise we are stuck in an infinite regression. The Universe can therefore be seen as an information processor, in other words a gigantic quantum computer.

This view that the Universe is a computer is also not novel. Konrad Zuse, a famous Polish mathematician who pioneered many cryptographic techniques used during World War II, was the first to view the Universe as a computer. He was followed by a number of other researchers, most notably by the Americans Ed Fredkin and Tom Toffoli, who in the 1970s wrote a number of papers on this very topic. Fredkin is still seen as the leading champion of the digital model of the Universe and its internal workings. The problem, however, is that all these models assume that the Universe is a classical computer. By now, however, we know that the Universe should be understood as a quantum computer.

Our reality evolves because every once in a while we find that we need to edit part of the program that describes reality. We may find that this piece of the program, based on a certain model, is refuted (the underlying model is found to be inaccurate), and hence the program needs to be updated. Refuting a model and changing a part of the program is, as we saw, crucial to changing reality itself because refutations carry much more information than simply confirming a model.

These refutations are manifested as ‘no-go' principles. Physics is littered with them. The Second Law of thermodynamics, which we saw was one of the most general laws of physics, is phrased to prohibit any transfer of heat from a cold to a hot body without any other effect. So, the Second Law would say that while we do not stipulate what physical processes can do, we certainly do know what they cannot do. Whilst we know the ‘known knowns' and ‘known unknowns' we do not know the ‘unknown unknowns'. And this is very powerful, because it is extremely general. The same is true for the theory of relativity, as relativity tells us that you cannot travel faster than the speed of light.

When it comes to quantum mechanics, this ‘no-go' way of speaking stretches our imagination to its limits. When we said that quantum mechanically an object can exist in two different places at once, this state is very difficult to understand using our everyday intuition. In fact, if we use the negative way, we are forced to acknowledge that (in some sense) it is not true that ‘the object is in two places at once' and it is also not true that the object is ‘not in two places at once'. So the statements that ‘an object is in two places at once' as well as its opposite ‘an object is not in two places at once' are both untrue. How can that be? It seems logically impossible that a statement and its negation are both incorrect. While to some this may be a contradiction, to Bohr this pointed to a deeper wisdom. He is reported to have said: ‘A shallow truth is a statement whose opposite is false; a deep truth is a statement whose opposite is also a deep truth'.

However, we do not really need to change the laws of ordinary logic to resolve the quantum conundrum. There is no contradiction here as the two statements refer to two different experimental procedures. When we say that it is not true that the particle is in two places at the same time, this really refers to our detection procedure. When we measure the position of the particle, the particle is always really recorded in one, or the other place, but never in both. This confirms that we indeed have a particle. However, when we do not measure at all, but instead interact with the object in a way that does not record its location, then the object behaves as if it was in both places at the same time. So, two different handlings of the object will reveal two different scenarios for its behaviour. And there is nothing really contradictory about this fact.

However, the emerging reality does depend on what question we ask. We can force objects to adopt different characteristics depending on which particular characteristic we measure. All quantum information is ultimately context dependent. Einstein really did not like this view of reality, which somehow tells you that reality is created through your observations and is therefore not independent of us.

Interestingly enough, there is a very close theological position to the general Popperian philosophy of science and this position is known as the Via Negativa (or the negative way). It was apparently held originally by the Cappadocian Fathers of the fourth century, who based their whole world-view on questions which cannot be answered. For example, they proclaimed that, while they believed in God, they did not believe that God exists. This may appear to be a great contradiction, but it really is not.

As a matter of fact, the negative way was also well known in the East. In Hinduism, the idea of approaching god in terms of Neti, Sanskrit for ‘not this', is very well established and documented from several ancient traditions, including Advaita Vedanta (which also specifies the Universe as single and inseparable, Brahman, whose features can only be grasped in the negative way).

The Cappadocian Fathers believed that one should describe the nature of God by focusing on what God is not rather than on what God is. The basic premise of this ‘negative' (also called apophatic, for Greek ‘what is not') theology is that God is so far beyond human understanding and experience that the only hope we have of getting close to the nature of God is to list all his negative features. And therefore we cannot say that God exists, because existence is a human notion and as such it may not apply to God.

This list of what God is not, compiled by the Cappadocian Fathers, is certainly rather reminiscent of the laws of physics and the general spirit of science. Physicists cannot really tell you what the Universe is or how exactly it behaves (or to be sure, we cannot tell what the ultimate description will be). But we can certainly tell you what it is not. We know that the Earth was not created 4000 years ago. It was much earlier, but we don't quite know exactly when. We don't exactly know how the Earth was created, but we do know that it did not arise by a giant turtle lifting its back above the surface of a cosmic ocean (or that the Earth was not formed before the Sun).

We also believe that the laws of physics are not different on Earth to anywhere else in the Universe, though we don't quite know what the ultimate laws of physics are (maybe quantum, maybe beyond quantum). Science, likewise, cannot really tell us fully about the ultimate origin of everything. Science is constructed more in a way that it tells us what the Universe is ‘not like' rather than what it is like. For example, science tells us that we should not think of the Earth as in the centre of the Universe. Or we should not think of humans as the central point or purpose of evolution. It does not tell us exactly how we should think of humans, but we definitely should not think of them as fundamentally any different to apes, for example.

The Cappadocian Fathers reach the ultimate knowledge of God in the same way that we reach the ultimate understanding of reality. They do it via saying what God is not, whereas we rely on the scientific method of conjectures and refutations which tells us what reality is not. Although the negative way of speaking is in religion frequently (and I think mistakenly) viewed as irrational mysticism, we see that, in fact, it has a very rational basis paralleled in the scientific method.

Through this negative way of describing reality, separating that which is not true from everything else, we compress reality into a set of laws. These laws are then used as correct until proven otherwise. The laws of physics are the compression of reality which, when run on a universal quantum computer, produce reality. But the compressed laws of physics still need this universal quantum computer to produce reality. Since we are trying to explain the origin of everything, where does that computer come from?

But it's even more dramatic than that. We have the laws of Nature, which when run on a computer produce reality. So the laws of Nature need a pre-existing computer to be effective. On the other hand, the functioning of the computer itself needs to be described by some kind of laws. So what came first, the quantum computer or the physical laws? We seem to have a kind of ‘chicken and egg' problem.

However, can the laws and the computer be created at the same time out of nothing? This possibility seems to be very difficult to imagine, but there have been many attempts at it throughout history. One way of doing so, that at least to me does not seem to be very elegant, or even scientifically valid, invokes what is known as the anthropic principle.

The anthropic principle states that the laws of the Universe are the way they are, because if they were different, we would not be here to talk about them. This argument might sound circular to you, but it is not. Any circular argument is, by default, logically correct (although trivially so, because they postulate what they later try to prove; think about the statement ‘I like Jennifer Lopez, because she is my favourite person.') but the anthropic principle may just happen to be plain wrong. We simply do not know if some other laws would also not lead to beings, like us, who can do science and discover laws of Nature. A more modern improvement on the anthropic principle has been promoted by Sir Martin Rees, the British Astronomer Royal and the current president of the Royal Society. In Rees' version, on which he once jokingly bet his dog's life, all possible Universes exist and we only exist in the subset of those that have the right conditions. Let's hope for his dog's sake that he is correct.

Another possible answer, as we have seen, is that someone created the laws and the computer to start with. Traditionally, God has been assumed to be the original information creator. Alas, then we have to explain the origin of God, which is equally difficult.

But just take computers, for instance. In our computers we can design different worlds. Every computer game is, in fact, a simulation of a world with possibly very different rules to our own. This is what makes games very exciting and possibly also very difficult. As games and computers become more and more sophisticated the graphics get better and it becomes more difficult to tell a simulation from the real thing (enter Keanu Reeves, The Matrix).

However we still can't get away from the reliance on God. God in this case is the computer programmer who programmed the software that gives us our Universe. The reason why this answer sits so uneasily with scientists is – as explained – that, although we have an arguably prettier picture, it really only just displaces the question of the origin of information. So, if you tell me that we are someone's simulation, then who created that someone and told them to simulate us?

All answers of this type quickly lead to what is called an infinite regression, which we encountered earlier. For every creator, we seem to need to invent another creator that created it. God created our Universe, and another god created the first god and so on ad infinitum . . . This is no real solution, and cannot form the basis for answers to questions such as ‘How come reality exists?'.

A similar problem of infinite regression led to von Neumman's theory of replication. There he faced the problem that one being has to contain a copy of the next generation which has to contain a copy of the next generation, and so on. It is clear that this kind of logic cannot be sustained in Nature because it requires you to store every future copy in the current version (i.e. an infinite amount of information in a limited amount of space). We simply have to look for some other possible explanation.

Throughout the ages it is interesting to note how the image of a god has changed in line with human knowledge. Prehistoric humans saw a different god in every element of life, and each god had to create that element and thereafter be responsible for it. With the Ancient Greeks, the notion of god was still polytheistic but their gods were smaller in number and correlated to more abstract notions such as love, war, peace, and happiness. There were also several religions that were pursuing a monotheistic view of god, for example Judaism, Christianity, and Islam. In the East we likewise encounter various versions of the principle of cosmic unity (though, in contrast, popular religion was presented in polytheistic terms).

The monotheistic view has survived for over two millennia but God's profession has changed somewhat. To Johannes Kepler, in the sixteenth century, God was a geometer, while for Newton, a century later, God was a physicist who, after creating the laws of physics together with the Universe, sat back and watched reality evolve. In Newton's world, the laws of physics are entirely deterministic and everything happens in an ordered fashion. In the latest incarnation of this story, we are talking about God as a computer scientist, sitting down and programming the Universe.

Although none of these roles that God has played can answer the question of the origin of information, there seems to be a distinct trend to God's role – namely, God seems to be less and less involved. Back in Ancient times, God had to create every little thing in the Universe and was responsible for its subsequent functioning – so you could say he had his work cut out for him. Then with Newton, on the other hand, God only had to create the laws of physics – once God had done this, he could just sit back and relax. It is therefore natural to ask if it's possible to reach a point where creation is so effortless that perhaps we don't even need a Creator.

There is a nice parallel in mathematics to what we are trying to argue for here, which is simply a version of the ‘creation out of nothing'. A fascinating method of creating natural numbers out of empty sets was devised by von Neumann in the 1920s. Here is what he imagined. A set is a collection of things (just like the Universe). An empty set is a collection that contains nothing at all – you can think of this as zero information. Von Neumann proposed that all numbers could be bootstrapped out of the empty set by the operations of the mind.

While this may seems a little odd initially, there is a beautiful logic to it. The mind observes the empty set. It is not difficult to imagine this empty set also containing an empty set within itself. But hold on, now we have an empty set containing an empty set, so does this means that the original set has an element (albeit the element is an empty set)? Yes, the mind has thus generated the number one by producing the set containing the empty set. If we then consider that the empty set contained within the empty set yet contains its own empty set, then the mind has thus generated the number two out of emptiness. It is a set containing the set with nothing in it, and the set with the set with nothing in it (I hope your head is not spinning by now!). And so it continues ad infinitum. In this way, the mind creates all natural numbers, but literally out of nothing – starting from only an empty set. Starting with no information can, using von Neumann's logic, surprisingly lead to a great deal of information. All natural numbers (and there are infinitely many of them) can therefore be created out of an entirely empty set. In other words, we seem to have created an infinite amount of information from zero information.

Note that in von Neumann's beautiful vision, every subsequent creation depends on the previous one. There is a long chain of interdependent (correlated) creations. Each time the mind makes a decision to view the empty set in a different way, a new number appears. Correlations are thus very fundamental to our description and understanding of von Neumann's logic. However outside von Neumann's logic they are also crucial in the real world and manifest themselves through mutual information. It is, in fact, tempting to say that things and events have no meaning in themselves, but that only the shared (mutual) information between them is ‘real'. All properties of physical objects, including their very existence, are only encoded in the relationships between them and hence in the information they share with other physical objects. This is not a particularly new view; this philosophy is already well developed and goes under the general name of ‘relationalism'.

Eastern religion and philosophy have a strong core of relational thinking. In Buddhism, in particular, there is the notion of ‘emptiness' that is akin to von Neumann's empty set. What emptiness means in Buddhism is that ‘things' do not exist in themselves, but are only possible in relation to other ‘things'. For example, think of a chair. What is it really? There is a whole branch of philosophy, known as ontology, devoted to the questions such as ‘What does it mean to be?', or ‘What exists and in what sense is it real?'. I apologize in advance to any ontologists out there and request their forgiveness as I continue to use the minimal amount of technical precision to make what I feel are the salient points needed for subsequent discussion.

Let us all imagine that a chair is just a collection of individual parts, such as armrests, the seat, and so on. Well, it could be, but all of these are just labels. Armrests and seats do not really exist independently of the context, e.g. you cannot have an armrest without the concept of a ‘chair' (let's assume only chairs have armrests) or the concept of an ‘arm'.

In search for the essence of ‘chairness', that which defines a chair independently of anything else, can we not just say that a chair is a collection of atoms in the shape of a chair? But ultimately an atom is also a label for a system containing some positively and some negatively charged particles as well as some neutral particles. And these have all been labelled by us (an electron, a proton, and a neutron). If you ask what an electron is, the answer would be a small negatively charged particle, but all this is just a big label that tells us how this particle behaves in various experiments (such as, it repels some particles and attracts others). It is ultimately a ‘label' to describe the various sorts of behaviour that electrons exhibit when we try to interact with them and manipulate them. Without this label we would have to call an electron something like ‘You know that particle that does X when we test Y and it does P when we look at it in Q, and so on'. In this way we can see that labels are awfully convenient and efficient. But Buddhism tells us that we should not confuse the label with the object. More importantly, just because we have a label for something, it does not mean that this something is real.

Quantum physics is indeed very much in agreement with Buddistic emptiness. The famous British astronomer Arthur Eddington put it this way: ‘The term "particle" survives in modern physics but very little of its classical meaning remains. A particle can now best be defined as the conceptual carrier of a set of variates . . . It is also conceived as the occupant of a state defined by the same set of variates . . . It might seem desirable to distinguish the "mathematical fictions" from "actual particles"; but it is difficult to find any logical basis for such a distinction. Discovering a particle means observing certain effects which are accepted as proof of its existence.'

Eddington claims here that a particle is just a set of labels that we use to describe outcomes of our measurements. And that's it. It all boils down to a relation between our measurements and our labels! The complexity that we see around us in this world (and this complexity we believe to be growing with time, as far as life is concerned at least) is just due to the growing interconnectedness.

In this way, can we now analyse how we encode reality? By doing so, we will never arrive at ‘the thing in itself' by any kind of means. Everything that exists, exists by convention and labelling and is therefore dependent on other things. So, Buddhists would say that their highest goal – realizing emptiness – simply means that we realize how inter-related things fundamentally are. Exactly the same is true in other Eastern religions. Less well known in the West is Advaita Vedanta – a Hindu philosophy that emphasizes the total oneness of the Universe. In this view our perceptions of separate entities is just an illusion – Maya. Even the Universe as a whole only exists by labelling and not by itself. Our reality is ‘that which is the sum total of all the observations and facts humanity has gathered so far'!

We have reached a point where any particle of matter (such as an atom) and energy (such as a photon) in the Universe is defined with respect to an intricate procedure that is used to detect it. If the detector makes a click (like a Geiger counter) the particle is detected. The click itself creates one extra bit of information comprising reality. The crucial point is that the particle does not exist independently of the detector.

But what exactly constitutes a click for any detector such as a Geiger counter? A click is the positive result of any experimental procedure capable of detecting the presence of a particle. This is done by generating a specific interaction between the experimental apparatus and the spatial region in which we are searching for the particle. The interaction needs to be carefully engineered – some interactions simply will not be able to serve this purpose, i.e. they will not give us the relevant bit of information. Going back to the photon example, a beam-splitter will not give us any information as to the existence of the photon. Nothing in the beam-splitter retains any record of the presence or absence of the photon that might have gone through. In other words, beam-splitters cannot produce clicks. If we want a click we have to use something instead of or in addition to beam-splitters, such as photomultipliers. Photomultipliers are designed so that the presence of a photon knocks out one electron, whose motion triggers an electrical current whose presence is amplified to the macroscopic level. This results in a click that we can hear, or any other effect that we can register with our senses.

We can push this a bit further, however. We can ask if the particle is the cause for the detector to click. The answer is no. The reason is that in quantum physics, as we have argued, particles exist and don't exist at the same time. Here I don't just mean that they exist in different places, I mean that even in one place a particle can exist and not exist simultaneously. This too is a direct consequence of quantum indeterminacy. What would this mean in the beam-splitter example discussed earlier? It means that a photon simultaneously enters and does not enter it and this implies that the only time it will be detected at the output is when it does exist. Whether the detector clicks or not is a genuinely random event that cannot be predicted by any means, in the same way that we cannot predict the photon's reflection at the beam-splitter. This implies that we should not say that an existing particle causes the click just like we cannot say that photon's reflection caused a click (since we know that it also passes through). The click has no cause at all and therefore we have no underlying particles.

And since there are no underlying particles in reality, there are no things in the Universe that are made up of particles existing without the intricate procedures to detect them. Detection events are genuinely random and the emerging reality is seen in the correlations, expressed as laws of physics, between the events, which are bits of information. If the link between the information compression and randomness is as Kolmogorov and Chaitin thought, then this conclusion is likely to hold no matter what underlying theory of Nature we discover in the future.

Reality is made up of quantum bits, each arising from a causeless click. A click entirely without a cause has the novel property that it introduces a discontinuity in time. Once an event is recorded, it is solidified forever in the Universe. It becomes an element of what we call the past. However, before the event occurs, we have an uncertainty as to when and if it will happen. All possibilities are then present at the same time and the game is completely open. The occurrence of the event then belongs to something we call the future. Fundamental randomness at the core of reality therefore allows us to have a distinction between the solidified, unchanging, past and a fluid, dynamic, future.

The distinction between the past and future separated by a discontinuity due to a measurement is always relative to the observer who recorded the measurement click. Someone who is able to control the observer and his interactions with the environment, would, according to our current understanding of quantum mechanics, be able to reverse the detection and thereby erase the observer's past. There is no contradiction here, it is purely an interplay between local information (that of the observer) and global information (that of the person who reverses the observation by manipulating the observer and environment).

An amazing issue to note is this. The above meditation in realizing emptiness is a very similar exercise to von Neumann's number creation out of empty sets; it just goes in the exact opposite direction. Von Neumann went from an empty set into an infinite set of real numbers and here we started with macroscopic objects and deconstructed them to find that actually there is nothing behind them, they are based on randomness, on no prior information.

This is the darkness of reality! Anything that exists in this Universe, anything to which you can attribute any kind of reality, only exists by virtue of the mutual information it shares with other objects in the Universe. Underneath this, nothing else exists, nothing else has any underlying reality and hence there is no infinite regression. It just has to be this way, as otherwise we are asking a finite Universe to contain an infinite amount of information – and this is clearly not possible!

Following this logic, it's more accurate to think of the evolution of the Universe as starting with all potential realities from which one reality simply emerges. From this initial state, which contains all possible subsequent futures, the first event occurs without any cause (i.e. a random event) and this gives us our first bit of information. So from all possible futures, now we have a smaller number of futures simply because the first event has occurred in a specific way and all subsequent events will have this event as their past. In this way mutual information is established between bits.

Here we can draw an analogy with sculpting. A sculptor starts with a block of stone out of which he intends to make a sculpture. In some sense, we can say that the initial untouched block contains all the possible sculptures to be made. This is a bit like our initial Universe where all possible realities exist at the same time, but are not actualized. The sculptor then makes the first move, and chisels a piece away from the block. This first cut by the artist breaks the symmetry and reduces the information contained in the initial block. We now no longer have all possible sculptures available to us as some of them, which required the piece that was chiselled away, can now no longer be realized.

For example, think of Michelangelo standing in front of a six metre block of stone, just about to begin work on his sculpture of David. David now stands proudly at five metres tall in the Galleria dell'Accademia in Florence, the masterpiece of a Renaissance genius. Imagine if the first move of this genius was a slip, where he cuts horizontally, so that he now has two smaller blocks each of height three metres. So he can still make a statue but would no longer be the same David. Imagine now that he makes another mistake, this would clearly impact what could or couldn't be created from the remaining block of stone. His possibilities are therefore reduced.

And so it continues, with every next move that the sculptor makes the number of possible futures decrease. Once the sculpture is finished, one possibility is crystallized. Even then, there are more things that could be done to change the sculpture, so we never really arrive at something final. Whenever we think we have something final, the sculptor can always make another cut. Of course, what happens when there are no cuts left to be made? Is this a realistic scenario? From what we have argued, this will never happen in the Universe, as a change of perspective generates new ideas and new information as to what the shape of reality could be. Through successively smaller and smaller alterations the sculptor will always be able to make another cut to whatever is left.

This very way of thinking about the Universe completely and faithfully embodies the spirit of how science operates. We gather information about the Universe by observing different things and these observations then go on to shape our reality. In this way reality emerges around us in a definite and concrete manner. However, since the information we gain from the Universe is defined through an observer, the question is how do we define this observer – do we have a universal observer whose observations we can trust beyond any doubt? Well, apart from bringing in the concept of a supernatural being (which is always a bit of a cop-out), every other observer seems as good as any other to define his or her reality.

In Chapter 2 we found ourselves defining reality through Calvino's card game. In this card game each player represents an observer, and in turn each observer represents a different aspect of reality (economics, physics, biology, social science, computer science, and philosophy). Each observer communicates what he has experienced through a sequence of playing cards. Physics would be telling us about physical laws, such as, if we drop an apple it will fall to the ground, or if we heat water beyond a certain temperature it will become steam. In the same way economics, biology, and all the other observers will also have their own story to tell.

Each observer at the table, as well as telling their own story, will listen to every other player's story. In this way reality emerges through the sharing of information between the players. For example, to date, the cards that have been revealed by physics indicate that the fastest speed of travel is the speed of light. This is not to say that in the future physics may not show us another card which then tells us that under certain conditions we could travel faster than the speed of light. Whilst the players are consistent in their stories, our interpretation of what we are observing evolves to a better and better approximation the longer we are given to observe. Just as in an everyday conversation, only hearing half the story inevitably only gives you a fraction of the information – and you may even get the wrong message entirely. Unfortunately, to wait for this game to be finished before making sense of its information content would require us to wait for the age of the Universe – so instead we are continually guessing at defining reality as best we can.

Each of the players communicates their story through the cards. These cards are assumed to be predefined (like a language) and enable the players to communicate their story. From our previous discussions can we say anything about where these cards come from? Actually we can. We have seen previously in this chapter that although information does come in discrete units (such as cards or bits of information), actually these discrete units are based on a fundamental level of randomness. So if the cards themselves have some element of randomness (i.e. sometimes a card could represent ‘force' and sometimes it could represent ‘peace') then how is it that anyone is able to tell a consistent story with these cards? Surely it would be impossible to tell a story with cards which are not well defined – it just doesn't seem logical! It is counterintuitive that although we seem to perceive a well-defined reality around us, quantum physics suggests that there is no underlying single reality in the Universe independent of us – and that our reality is actually only defined if and when we observe it.

For example, when a particle of light, a photon, encounters a piece of glass like your bedroom window, two outcomes can occur. One outcome is that the photon can be reflected, and the other one is that it can pass through the window. Quantum physics tells us that if we observe the photon we will never be able to predict the outcome in advance, this process is completely random. But what happens if we do not observe the photon? Then quantum physics suggests that the photon takes both alternatives: it both goes through the glass and is also reflected – it exists in two places simultaneously, i.e. there are two distinct realities!

But we only seem to see one reality around us, you never see the same person existing in two different places at the same time. So how does the act of observation allow one reality to emerge out of two or more realities? Quantum physics seems to imply that reality somehow emerges through interactions between observers and the observed. This is reminiscent of a magician's trick, where the main point is to make a card appear from a pack of cards within which it didn't exist. To make this point clearer, let me convey the same message through a simple game.

Suppose you have four players, each of whom is given four cards at the beginning of the game. The goal of the game is for a player to obtain four of the same cards (four aces, four tens, etc.) by exchanging cards with other players. The first person to do this is the winner. There are, however, a couple of rules. The first rule is that you can only ask for a card if you already have at least one of those cards. So you can only ask someone for an ace, if you are holding at least one ace. Now if the person says no, that means they do not have an ace and the game passes to the next player. If they do have the card, they must give it to you and then you have the option of asking the same player again or another player. When you ask for an ace, all other players immediately know that you have at least one ace. The next player in turn then knows what to get from you. Of course this is a very simple game and really doesn't need more than a couple of rounds to find a winner.

The amazing thing is that we don't really need cards to play the game. This is where it gets interesting. The whole game can be played just inside the players' heads where each player imagines four completely arbitrary cards, which is non-standard, in that there is no limit on what image can be on any card or how many of these images exist. For example, one person could imagine three elephant cards and a crocodile card, whilst someone else could imagine two aces and two apple cards. As long as we add the requirement that you can't start with four of the same cards then we know that you must be forced to ask at least one question. Surprisingly whilst there seems to be an infinite number of combinations, this is actually not a problem and we can always find a winner. The saving grace is that the players cannot change any choices that would affect the consistency of the game so far, although they can change their cards throughout the game. For example, if you've asked someone else for a card, then you must at least possess a card of that type. And if someone has asked for a particular card then they must give up that card if it has been asked for by someone else. This requirement of consistency and the ability to change your cards to win the game is what quickly narrows down the multitude of different possibilities as the game proceeds. Both answering and asking a question affects both the cards that you hold and the cards the other players hold. In this way this imagined version without physical cards or limits reduces to the fixed game and we ultimately end up with a definite winner.

This constant questioning is analogous to experimentation in physics, where we start by observing an infinite number of possibilities; however through interaction with the system and by modifying our experiments in line with the information available, this reduces to a smaller set of possible outcomes and then to an eventual winner, a single reality. Experiments too have to be consistent with the rules of the game, the laws of physics. Reality is therefore created by experiments in the same way that cards become created in this imaginary card game. Through this analogy, I hope the reader gets a feel for the bizarreness of quantum mechanics.

I said that information in the Universe is indeed very much like Calvino had imagined. It is discrete (and we saw why this is advantageous when we talked about DNA and life), it is context dependent and it is finite. The crucial aspect missing in Calvino's card game is that in reality, there are no cards. Nature does not give us cards to start with; this is a special no-go theorem of quantum physics excluding the so-called hidden variables. We have to create the cards ourselves through observations.

The proper analogy between cards and information in the Universe is a combination of Calvino's card game with the one we described earlier. Imagine that each player has a different set of cards, and each card has no predefined meaning. This means that just like the sculptor, who when he starts with the block of stone can carve any shape, we have the initial conditions to define any reality that we care to, because at the beginning of the game all possible realities can potentially exist.

As you question other people to gather your cards, your life story unfolds in an unpredictable way, a way that depends on what cards other people tell you they possess. This process is not fixed by anything other than the consistency of the stories they have already told. For example, if physics told us that it dropped an apple which fell to the ground, then it cannot later change its story that the apple did not fall to the ground – the event has been defined and communicated and now it exists on record and cannot be changed. If we later discover that under some circumstances the apple does not fall to the ground, this does not contradict the player's story, it just adds a new insight – in that under certain conditions it may not fall.

The main feature of the ‘card game without cards' is precisely the fact that cards emerge out of nowhere. We start with no information at all (or with infinite information, as is more appropriate, since all possibilities are open). Anything is possible as far as card arrangements and signs are concerned. Then we start questioning and out emerges a definite order. Questions, because they are subject to a (very small) set of rules, reveal a certain type of reality that was not there before (or without) the questions. In a typical card game all the cards are fixed when dealt, but this is clearly not so in our game.

Touching upon that sensitive issue of having cards without any cards existing in the first place, the British chemist Peter Atkins offers an explanation: ‘In the beginning there was nothing. Absolute void, not merely empty space. There was no space; nor was there time, for this was before time. The Universe was without form and void. By chance there was a fluctuation and a set of points, emerging from nothing and taking their existence from the pattern they formed, defined a time.' Then the space (and therefore cards) gets created in a similar way and the rest is history. This version of events looks appealing, but the trouble is that the initial fluctuation that leads to everything is difficult to quantify without any prior theory, i.e. without the rules of the card game. In order to define the size and probability of a fluctuation, we usually need more information, like, for example, knowledge of quantum theory, one of the key rules of the game.

Just as we need the laws of physics to describe events, events themselves need the laws of physics to happen. So, which of the two came first? If we imagine that the laws of physics came first and they then dictate how events unfold, are we really being consistent? Laws of physics become laws because there are events which consistently produce outcomes in accordance with those laws. Events are therefore the material onto which the laws are written. In order for the laws of physics to come first, this would mean that there were no prior events in accordance with this law and therefore the question remains whether this is a law at all, though as we have seen, mutual information can arise out of no overall information and events themselves can happen without any prior rule.

Leibniz's logic was that the simplest possible state of the Universe is the one that contains nothing, so the fact that we see something is for him the best proof for the existence of God. However, in our picture, having nothing at the beginning corresponds to no information. In Shannon's theory this would mean zero entropy of the whole Universe. Any subsequent information gain is not necessarily proof for the existence of God because, as we have seen, mutual information can be ultimately generated locally even though the information overall remains zero.

We can construct our whole reality in this way by looking at it in terms of two distinct but inter-related arrows of knowledge. We have the spontaneous creation of mutual information in the Universe as events unfold, without any prior cause. This kicks off the interplay between the two arrows. On the one hand, through our observations and a series of conjectures and refutations, we compress the information in the Universe into a set of natural laws. These laws are the shortest programs to represent all our observations. On the other hand, we run these programs to generate our picture of reality. It is this picture that then tells us what is, and isn't, possible to accomplish, in other words, what our limitations are.

The Universe starts empty but potentially with a huge amount of information. The key event that gives the Universe some direction is the first act of ‘symmetry breaking', the first cut of the sculptor. This act, which we consider as completely random, i.e. without any prior cause, just decides on why one tiny aspect in the Universe is one way rather than another. This first event sets in motion a chain reaction in which, once one rule has been decided, the rest of the Universe needs to proceed in a consistent manner. Just like in Calvino's card game, the next piece of the story must be consistent with the previous.

This is where the first arrow of knowledge begins. We compress the spontaneous, yet consistent information in the Universe, into a set of natural laws that continuously evolve as we test and discard the erroneous ones. Just as man evolved through a compression of biological information (a series of optimizations for the changing environment), our understanding of the Universe (our reality) has also evolved as we better synthesize and compress the information that we are presented with into more and more accurate laws of Nature. This is how the laws of Nature emerge, and these are the physical, biological, and social principles that our knowledge is based on.

The second arrow of knowledge is the flip-side to the first arrow. Once we have the laws of Nature, we explore their meaning in order to define our reality, in terms of what is and isn't possible within it. It is a necessary truth that whatever our reality, it is based exclusively on our understanding of these laws. For example, if we have no knowledge of natural selection, all of the species look independently created and without any obvious connection. Of course this is all dynamic in that when we find an event that doesn't fit our description of reality, then we go back and change the laws, so that the subsequently generated reality also explains this event.

The basis for these two arrows is the darkness of reality, a void from which they were created and within which they operate. Following the first arrow, we ultimately arrive at nothing (ultimately there is no reality, no law without law). The second arrow then lifts us from this nothingness and generates a picture of reality as an interconnected whole.

So our two arrows seem to point in opposite directions to one another. The first compresses the information available into succinct knowledge and the second decompresses the resulting laws into a colourful picture of reality. In this sense our whole reality is encoded into the set of natural laws. We already said that there was an overall direction for information flow in the Universe, i.e. that entropy (disorder) in the Universe can only increase. This gives us a well-defined directionality to the Universe, commonly known as the ‘arrow of time'. So how do our two arrows of knowledge stand in relation to the arrow of time?

The first arrow of knowledge clearly acts like a Maxwell's demon. It constantly combats the arrow of time and tirelessly compresses disorder into something more meaningful. It connects seemingly random and causeless events into a string of mutually inter-related facts. The second arrow of knowledge, however, acts in the opposite direction of increasing the disorder. By changing our view of reality it instructs us that there are more actions we can take within the new reality than we could with the previous, more limited view.

Within us, within all objects in the Universe, lie these two opposing tendencies. So, is this a constant struggle between new information and hence disorder being created in the Universe, and our efforts to order this into a small set of rules? If so, is this a losing battle? How can we ever compete with the Universe?

Key points

Scientific knowledge proceeds via a dialogue with Nature. We ask ‘yes-no' questions through our observations of various phenomena.

Information in this way is created out of no information. By taking a stab in the dark we set a marker which we can then use to refine our understanding by asking such ‘yes-no' questions.

This inductive method, which is the basis of constructing physical theories, I called the darkness of physics. Stating that something is not is the key to building better and better models of the world. Physical laws are usually more fundamental the more they rule out: ‘no such process exists, where so and so would happen' is a typical way of formulating it.

There are many parallels in religion which use the Nagative Way to reach the ultimate truth. Two prominent examples are the Cappadocian Fathers in early Christianity and Advaita Vedanta in Hinduism.

The whole of our reality emerges by first using the conjectures and refutations to compress observations and then from this compression we deduce what is and isn't possible.